Dielinke-dortmund.
Municipal Election Programme 2020 A different Dortmund is possible.
The social-ecological change is inevitable.
Finance 7 Fair financial policy – communal economy based on solidarity.
Housing 17 Dignified housing for all!
Climate and environment 22.
Dortmund is a socially divided city, whose social spaces hardly exchange with each other any more.
An ever richer upper class stands against a shrinking middle class and an impoverished lower class.
There is a housing shortage in the city, and homelessness is increasing drast.
Dortmund is also threatened by the effects of the climate catastrophe.
Social and environmental policy belong together.
Justice cannot be implemented in a capitalist basic order.
Overcoming the capitalist economic and social order is one of the general political goals of DIE LINKE.
The Left is committed to strengthening young people.
It promotes spaces for young people in which they can develop their independence, solidarity and social competence.
The individual development of young people is more important than profit and capital interests.
The Left is part of the global movement for socialism, which stands for the coexistence of free individuals in a solidarity-based community.
For The Left, democracy is an essential element of socialism.
The town of Dortmund has been at risk of losing its financial capacity to act and its self-administration to the supervisory authority for many years.
The debts of the city of Dortmund now amount to around 2.6 billion euros (2020 budget) Every resident in Dortmund is therefore burdened with a public debt of around 7,200 euros.
Dortmund will never be able to pay off this mountain of debt on its own.
The Left says quite clearly: this ruinous cycle must be stopped as quickly as possible.
The main responsibility for the state of the cities lies at the federal and state level – in the socially unjust tax system, which unilaterally burdens the costs of the community on workers.
Dortmund has the second highest risk of poverty in Germany – after Duisburg.
23.9 percent of Dortmunders are threatened by poverty.
The Left wants to bring DEW21 back into full municipal ownership and end cooperation with the climate killer RWE.
The city should organise broad citizen participation in municipal investment planning as a first step towards this.
Social disadvantage, poverty and exclusion have been evident in Dortmund for eight years.
But now we have a report on 172 pages – with figures and facts!
The official action plan ‘Social City’ has relieved the disadvantaged social spaces because it is chronically underfunded and relies primarily on unpaid voluntary work by citizens.
The Left clearly says: In a social city, all people must feel comfortable and at home.
DIE LINKE is calling for controlled diamorphine distribution to curb procurement crime.
Drug addicts do not need more controls, but a system that shows them alternatives and breaks the cycle of criminalisation.
The main cause of poverty is unemployment (see also Chapter 6.
Work).
Over 31,000 Dortmund men and women were unemployed in October 2019.
The LEFT is committed to an active municipal labor market policy.
120,000 pensioners in Dortmund are older than 65 years; over 36,000 are even older than 80 years.
Almost every second statutory pension in Germany (48 percent) is below 800 euros per month.
For pensioners - not only for the poor - social contacts are vital.
To do justice to age, a broad spectrum of guarantees for self-determination, freedom and social justice is required.
This also includes the possibility of alternative forms of housing such as senior WGs or multi-generational houses.
The Left is committed to a needs-based, area-based and quality-based offer of social and nursing care in old age.
The Left demands that political participation for all citizens be simplified and made possible.
People with disabilities and chronic illnesses still face insurmountable barriers.
The demands of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities from 2009 have not yet been fully implemented.
Full participation in society is a human right.
Inclusion requires barrier-free access.
Existing barriers of all kinds in all areas of life must be energetically dismantled.
DIE LINKE is committed to the dismantling of institutional structures in which disabled or elderly people live in isolation.
An alternative is the construction of inclusive multi-generational houses.
The disabled transport service must be maintained and expanded.
The limitation of the number of free rides must be abolished.
The guidance systems for blind and visually impaired people in public spaces must be expanded.
A disabled representative in the city, who will receive a veto right against projects that are hostile to the disabled.
Dortmund is heading for a housing shortage, especially for people with low incomes.
Low-income households are increasingly burdened by the rising costs of basic rent and additional costs and spend over 30 percent of their monthly available money for a roof over their heads.
The Left is calling for affordable housing for all, because housing is a human right.
Even people with disabilities must receive a minimum wage.
The Left says: the federal government, the state and the municipalities must guarantee a stock of publicly supported housing that is based on real needs.
In NRW alone, 100,000 social housing units must be provided every year.
Newly built homes must remain permanently occupied and subject to price controls.
According to the current Dortmund housing market report, in 2017, only 267 new rental apartments were built with the help of state funds; in 2018, there were only 189 apartments.
Dortmund has around 1,400 homeless people who cannot find affordable accommodation.
The Left says: In order to ensure a sustainable improvement in the housing market, the city must invest more in municipal housing construction.
At least 1,000 "affordable homes" must be built every year, the Left says.
The Left is calling for a fundamental change: The purchase of land and housing by property and financial investors must be stopped.
Land speculation must be prevented.
Existing municipal building land may only be allocated for new housing construction under the leasehold system.
The rights of tenants must be strengthened; tenant initiatives must be granted the right to bring a class action.
For recipients of social benefits, free advice and support must be guaranteed in matters of tenancy law.
Private housing stocks are to be communalised wherever possible and made available to the affordable housing market segment.
The Left calls for a social ecological change in Germany and also in Dortmund.
Dortmund has not yet achieved its climate goals.
The Left will continue to work for the preservation of open spaces, clean air, clean drinking water and a noise-free environment.
Anyone who wants social housing policy should vote for DIE LINKE on 13 September.
The Left wants to develop more forest areas in Dortmund, protect existing forests and reforest them.
Forests store a lot of CO2.
These forests should be as natural as possible, because natural forests are more resistant to drought and disease than mere tree plantations for the purpose of harvesting wood.
The Left sees a long overdue transport revolution as a great opportunity to save many greenhouse gases.
The Left wants to use the opportunities of the large city development projects in the coming electoral period.
The decline of the old industries has left many industrial wastelands behind.
The Left is against the privatization of public parks and inner-city open spaces such as the Fredenbaum Park or the West Park.
The management of the parks should be carried out by a newly founded Green Space Office.
The Left wants to use the International Garden Exhibition to develop new road connections, especially for bicycles and pedestrians.
The 25 percent rule for social housing construction must be adhered to.
Environmental zones are to be welcomed in principle, but their effect on the polluted inner city is too weak.
DIE LINKE wants to have bulky waste collected free of charge.
DIE LINKE wants to make driving bans unnecessary by adhering to the limit values.
The wall should in future be developed into a circular promenade with cafés, discos, street theatres, studios and other things.
The cycle path should be expanded on its own tracks.
The Left welcomes the cost-intensive efforts of the responsible waterworks to renovate and modernize their facilities.
The Left Party is calling for a programme for the greening of facades in the inner city.
Protected areas in the city should be consistently designated as nature reserves or landscape conservation areas.
Commercial forest management with intensive timber utilisation carries the risk of the death of entire forest areas in times of climate change.
The Left is seeking the de-sealing of areas in favour of the groundwater house.
The Left wants to significantly increase the number of street trees.
A leaf roof cools the streets and provides fresh air.
The Pleckenbrinksee, which is important for bird protection, has been placed under nature conservation.
The planned construction of the L663n motorway (OW IIIa) is a threat to nature and leisure areas in the east of Dortmund.
The LEFT demands the permanent protection of the Buschei and Alte Körne nature reserves in the Scharnhorst district.
Construction on the edge of the nature reserves must be avoided.
The Dortmund farmers should be oriented towards ecological agriculture.
The use of chili, for example, keeps even the toughest boar away.
The Left Party demands that all municipal political decisions be oriented towards the goal of achieving a complete withdrawal from the fossil energy industry by 2030.
Replacement jobs must be created for all jobs that are lost as a result.
The great potential of solar energy that is offered by the roofs of urban buildings and municipal facilities must be utilised quickly and comprehensively.
The Left Party is committed to the introduction of a vocational school for future energies at the vocational college.
The Left is in favour of the complete re-municipalisation of the Dortmund energy supply.
The relief of large consumers must stop, which is paid for by ordinary consumers.
RWE has integrated the entire power generation sector into its own power plant park.
The Left demands that the phase-out of nuclear energy be completed according to plan.
The Left is calling for the cessation of these transports of radioactive material.
Instead, we demand the closure of the plant in Gronau and all other plants that process nuclear fuels or other materials suitable for the production of nuclear weapons (including for export).
5.
Transport and Mobility Mobility is a public good whether in the city, the suburbs or rural areas.
The Left demands that all stops in Dortmund must be barrier-free.
This includes not only the construction of lifts and ramps, but also a complete system of blind guides and announcements.
DIE LINKE considers the merger of the transport associations in NRW to be a good idea.
This will make it possible to plan in a more coordinated way.
The Left wants more cycle parking spaces and charging facilities for e-bikes.
The number of HGVs in the city must be reduced.
Cyclists must be protected by their own barriers, just like pedestrians.
The possibilities for transport must be improved.
More rights for pedestrians.
A city of pedestrian-friendly paths keeps space for pedestrians, goes against blocked paths, ensures safe, comfortable and adequately fast progress.
The aim is also occasional places to rest as well as offers for playful transportation for children.
The area within the walls and Münsterstraße should become a car-free zone.
The driving ban for lorries over 7.5 tonnes on the B1 in the Dortmund city area will finally be implemented in 2020.
The Dortmund airport is one of the worst environmental sins in the city area.
Per passenger kilometer, flying is even more damaging to the climate than driving and is significantly more damaging than taking the train.
In Germany, CO2 emissions from air traffic have doubled since 1990.
The Dortmund airport makes losses in the tens of millions of euros every year.
The aim of DIE LINKE is to develop environmentally and climate-friendly mobility without the use of fossil fuels.
This includes the phasing out of kerosene-powered air travel.
The argument of jobs is often used to justify the maintenance of the airport.
The airport does not offer more jobs than other logistics companies.
Public space belongs to everyone, but it is largely designed for automobile traffic.
Motorised individual transport is one of the most important emitters of the climate gas CO2.
The goal is a largely car-free inner city.
No new roads, instead, the return of existing roads, speed limits and a reduction of areas reserved for parking.
Unemployment with all its consequences violates human dignity and leads to a vicious circle of social problems.
Over 100,000 people, not just the unemployed, are dependent on transfer payments in Dortmund.
The Nordstadt concept of the Council decided to convert all "1-Euro-Jobs" in the Nordstadt into employment relationships subject to social insurance.
However, the implementation of the decision has been delayed by the administration for years.
The Left demands a minimum wage of 12 euros per hour.
The development of the economy is not to the advantage of our city.
With old strategies, economic development will also miss its targets in the future.
The wrong way is a dumping competition of cities for the lowest fees and corporate taxes.
A central goal of politics must be to offer all people good work and to reduce long-term unemployment.
The Left demands the creation of permanent, good, full-time and socially insured jobs for the long-term unemployed.
Sparkassen must remain as public institutions in order to guarantee credit to small and medium-sized enterprises.
Public services and institutions provide for existence.
Social security and social justice require well-developed public services and public ownership of essential natural and cultural goods.
The Left is clearly in favour of strengthening the public service as the largest employer.
The ideology of a “lean state’ in combination with the drying up of municipal finances is one of the main causes of unemployment.
Municipal rationalisation projects must not create even more unemployment.
Rising birth rates have also led to the fact that the childcare quota cannot be met.
DIE LINKE demands the expansion of childcare places with a group size of a maximum of 15 children and a care ratio of one educator per five children.
Unemployed families should not be systematically referred to 25-hour places or to the end of the waiting lists in Kitas and day care.
The legal claim of the child to day care applies regardless of the employment status of the parents.
The parental wish should be met as much as possible.
At least one vegetarian or vegan menu should be offered daily.
Free and public education is a human right – a right that every child is entitled to, regardless of social status and income of the parents.
Education policy is connected to a wide range of social problems: opportunities in the job market, income, integration, cultural participation and the use of political rights depend on the level of education.
In Dortmund, the social division of the city is particularly obvious in the education gap between affluent and poor districts.
The Left demands language promotion programs from the daycare center to vocational school.
Parents must be included in language education, especially parents with a migration background.
No interference by global corporations or the Bundeswehr.
The Left says no to overcrowded classrooms, stressed teachers and poor teaching!
It demands the reduction of class sizes to 18 pupils as a first step towards 12.
The Left is committed to parent-free after-school care including a healthy school meal.
The health service is an original task of the public sector and must no longer be subject to economic interests.
The Left is calling for a qualification offensive for the training of nursing staff in all clinics and care and support facilities in public ownership in Dortmund.
In 2018, Dortmund hospitals pointed out that the staffing situation in the intensive care unit was no longer sufficient in some cases.
More staff, especially in nursing, is urgently needed.
The state government intends to significantly reduce the number of the 350 hospitals in North Rhine-Westphalia.
Affected will be mainly cities with a high density of hospitals.
DIE LINKE proposes the creation of a hospital conference, in which all affected groups participate.
The objectives of care should be determined there, and in what form the existing facilities can contribute to their implementation.
The transfer of ownership of a residential and care home must be re-nationalised.
The Left supports day care that is based on multi-generational concepts.
Good day care supports individuals in their daily routine, creates social contacts, offers stimulating leisure activities and counteracts the tendency to isolation.
Despite formal gender equality, women* are still exposed to many different forms of discrimination.
Women are still less trusted, they still hit the ‘glass ceiling’ and are still underrepresented in management levels.
The Left wants to ban sexist or stereotype-promoting advertising on municipal areas.
Dortmund politics should counteract the underrepresentation of women.
Women should also be systematically promoted in the municipal administration.
The Left makes it clear: the boundaries do not run between the sexes, but rather between upstairs and downstairs.
The Left wants open, diverse and multifaceted municipalities.
This includes the coexistence of people in different life situations and with different lifestyles.
Fascist and right-wing populist organizations want the opposite and set out to spread hate against minorities and migrants.
The Right-wing scene is a daily threat to many people in the municipalities.
Neo-fascism has a long tradition in Dortmund.
The Left rejects the extremism theory, which places antifascists and the Left on an equal footing with Nazis and racists.
The attack by Nazis on election night 2014 on the town hall shows that they rely on violence.
The municipal election program 2020 of DIE LINKE wants to preserve the already laid stumbling stones and keep the memory of the victims of the Nazis alive in a very concrete way in the streets.
DIE LINKE has long demanded the banning of the terror group Combat 18 in Germany.
Canada had already put the German section "Combat 18" of the American "Blood and Honour" terrorists on the anti-terror list last year.
Die LINKE demands the renaming of streets and squares that still bear the names of accomplices of German fascism or of racists, antisemites and militarists.
In Dortmund, almost 35 percent of the population has a migration background.
Among children under six years of age, there are even many more.
For the most part, they have found their current home in the impoverished city districts of Dortmund.
There is an above-average competition, for example, for living space and childcare places.
Dortmund is making commendable efforts to mitigate the effects of unequal starting conditions.
However, the factual segregation of migrant and non-migrant city districts has DIE LINKE strongly supports an additional funding offer.
A municipal policy committed to peace rejects the support of war preparations and warmongering: advertising for the Bundeswehr may not be supported by the city.
Twinning arrangements should be developed beyond protocol gestures into a lived exchange of population groups.
The city council has agreed to the ICAN City Appeal and has made a commendable commitment to a world free of nuclear weapons.
Dortmund is a city with a clear separation between the poor and the well-off.
There is a high culture, which is only accessible to a part of the population.
An expansion of the Dortmund Pass for broader cultural access is necessary.
The Left rejects a ruinous cultural competition between the Ruhr cities.
The main focus of the DIE LINKE party is on amateur sports, especially children's and youth sports.
The party is in favor of free admission to sports and leisure facilities for children from low-income families and for unbureaucratically approved free club memberships.
The Dortmund Pass must include all outdoor pools.
The city is responsible for maintaining and improving the infrastructure in this area.
The Left demands more opportunities for participation in the commune and full transparency in political decision-making processes.
The Left rejects administrative reform that leads to the privatisation of public tasks or the transfer of burdens to the municipalities.
The improvements must not be at the expense of the employees in the administration, whose health is put at risk by overloading or underloading.
All 12 districts of Dortmund must be preserved.
The Left demands that digitalisation and technical progress benefit the entire society.
The more efficient design of work processes and increasing productivity must be used to reduce working hours with full pay and personal compensation.
Smart City is supposedly a project to strengthen Dortmund as a digital economic location.
What is happening is the sale of public space and the data of Dortmund residents.
The Left does not want an expansion of the video surveillance of public spaces.
Video surveillance does not prevent crimes, but rather shifts them.
The Left demands that the city administration switch to open-source programs.
Open source means that everyone can see, change and adapt the source code of the computer program.
The Left wants the use of open interfaces.
Investments in the equipment of schools must be increased, both in technology and in the employment of computer science teachers.
The support of the state of NRW must be demanded.
The election period in the Dortmund Council and the district councils has lasted six years due to the repeated merging of the elections for mayor and council.
Hartz IV recipients are no longer being evicted from social housing.
The number of forced relocations due to housing that is not considered affordable has decreased significantly.
25 percent of the apartments in every new development plan in the city will be designated as social housing in 2019.
Our strategy for restructuring economic youth welfare has now been implemented throughout the city.
The Green children and youth commissioner left behind, it was important to take new paths here.
Dortmund has joined the Cities Alliance against Nuclear Weapons.
The city administration is over-aged overall.
No one in Dortmund will be deported to war and thus possibly directly to their death.
The operating times of the H-Bahn at Dortmund University could also be extended to include Saturdays thanks to our involvement, much to the delight of students.
A new modern transport station is also to be built at Dortmund Town Hall following a successful application by THE LEFT.
It has become common knowledge in the Dortmund Council that such PPPs are uneconomical.
A red-red-green majority has spoken out in favor of a transportation revolution and the ‘emissions-free city center’ with a reconstruction of the Wallring.
The term ‘climate emergency’ was rejected by the council majority.
The partnership agreement of the Dortmund energy and water supplier DEW21 was extended.
DIE LINKE has always advocated for the takeover of the shares held by RWE in DeW21.
Cyclists 33, 36 Cycling 25, 32 Racism 50, 52 Right-wing scene 51 right-wing extremism 53f.
Renewable energy sources 30 Re