Municipal Election Programme 2020 A different Dortmund is possible.
Social.
Ecological.
Solidarity.
Schwanenstraße 30, 44135 Dortmund Telephone:0231 / 222 1116 E-Mail:info@dielinke-dortmund.de V.
i.
S.
d.
P.
Christian Seyda, District Speaker More information: Homepage: www.dielinke-dortmund.de Facebook: https://www.facebook.com Twitter: https://twitter.com Municipal Election Programme 2020 The social-ecological change is inevitable 1.
Finance 7 Fair financial policy – communal economy based on solidarity 2.
Social affairs 10 Combating poverty – creating social justice 2.1.
Clearing the way 14 Full participation in society is a human right 3.
Housing 17 Dignified housing for all!
4.
Climate and environment 22 4.1.
Environment 22 Preventing climate catastrophe and creating climate justice 4.2.
Ecology and biodiversity 26 Preserving the stability of our ecosystems 4.3.
Energy 29 Energy must be affordable and environmentally friendly 5.
Transport and mobility 31 Mobility is a public good 6.
Work 37 Economic policy must be employment policy 7.
Children, youth and school 41 Free good education for all – already from a young age 8.
Health 45 For a healthy and social city 9.
Equality and gender justice 49 Equality is not yet working 10.
Anti-fascism 50 No to fascism, racism, right-wing populism 11.
Migration, human rights and solidarity 54 For a life without discrimination 12.
Peace 56 For a respectful and peaceful coexistence 13.
Culture, sport and leisure 57 Culture and sport for all!
14.
Democracy and transparency 59 More information and decision-making opportunities for residents 15.
Digitalisation 61 Taking advantage of the opportunities of digitalisation – ensuring data sovereignty 16.
Concluding words 63 Social even after the election: DIE LINKE has kept its promises Municipal election programme 2020 The social-ecological change is unavoidable “Dortmund is a socially divided city, whose social spaces hardly exchange with each other any more.” This is how the Dortmund-born social scientist and poverty researcher Prof.
Christoph Butterwegge assessed the situation in the city years ago.
The new social report of the city administration underlines this assessment.
Around 130,000 people are dependent on the receipt of social benefits such as Hartz IV, basic security in old age or housing benefit.
Around 100,000 people work in the low-wage sector.
An ever richer upper class stands against a shrinking middle class and an impoverished lower class.
Growing social inequality and social hardship are noticeable and tangible for all who are out and about in the city.
There is a housing shortage in the city, and homelessness is increasing drast At the same time, Dortmund is also threatened by the effects of the climate catastrophe.
Drought years seem to be the norm, storms in the autumn and spring cause great damage, heat waves threaten the health of people.
Nature is threatened with a comprehensive restructuring with the extinction of numerous animal and plant species, even here in Dortmund.
Social and environmental policy belong together.
That is why DIE LINKE is calling for a social-ecological change.
People with low incomes live in the climatically unfavourable, emissions-polluted and unhealthy parts of the city.
It is also true that: those who have difficulties securing their food do not have the opportunity to buy expensive but ecological food from the organic shop.
Those who do not know how the next month's rent will be paid, do not have the means to invest in energy-saving measures.
Those who have to commute to work every day need better offers in public transport, but not new consumption taxes, which further reduce the available income.
Justice cannot be implemented in a capitalist basic order.
If endless economic growth in a finite world is elevated to the status of a religion and social reality is just as much ignored as the destruction of our livelihoods, then it is time for a change.
The possibilities of left-wing local politics are very limited.
The limits are often set by the capitalist-shaped framework conditions, which cannot be fundamentally changed at the municipal level.
This includes chronic underfunding of municipalities.
Nevertheless, DIE LINKE also wants to fight against the misdevelopments of the economic system at the municipal level in order to make life easier for as many people as possible.
Overcoming the capitalist economic and social order is one of the general political goals of DIE LINKE.
DIE LINKE was founded in 2007 and participates in elections in order to give a voice to all those who are not otherwise heard.
Social progress, as DIE LINKE understands it, will only be achievable on a national level down to the local level if it is possible to win as many people as possible to actively fight for their interests.
DIE LINKE will help to initiate and support such struggles.
Therefore, the cooperation with social movements, with citizens' initi The Left is committed to strengthening young people.
It promotes spaces for young people in which they can develop their independence, solidarity and social competence.
The individual development of young people is more important than profit and capital interests.
For The Left, it is clear that a strong youth is our future.
The Left strives to live up to the goals of a solidarity-based society as much as possible already today, in the conviction that another Dortmund is possible, and that another world is possible.
This other world should no longer be a commodity.
The Left is part of the global movement for socialism, which stands for the coexistence of free individuals in a solidarity-based community.
For The Left, democracy is an essential element of socialism.
Real democracy and capitalism are incompatible.
Therefore, socialism means that banks and corporations, as well as all companies providing essential services, are transferred into public ownership and subject to democratic control by employees and consumers.
The functionaries in business and politics must always be electable and removable and must not receive any privileges.
Municipal Election Programme 2020 1.
Finances Fair financial policy - solidary municipal economy Whoever wants democracy must defend the self-administration of towns and municipalities.
Although it is anchored in the Basic Law, the towns are being financially starved.
Federal and state laws are constantly imposing new tasks on them without providing sufficient financial resources.
The principle of conexity - "whoever orders must also pay" - is systematically undermined.
The town of Dortmund has been at risk of losing its financial capacity to act and its self-administration to the supervisory authority for many years.
Year after year, the town's income fell behind its expenditure.
Only in the last two years has the town approached a balanced budget - mainly because of the business tax increase demanded early on by the left wing of the council.
This found a majority after several years and has now brought record income from business taxes for Dortmund, also due to the current economic boom.
However, this economic boom will not last forever - the next economic trough is already visible.
The consequences of this situation: necessary municipal services for citizens are being cut.
For years, the city has been dragging along an investment backlog in public buildings or schools.
Public property is being privatized more and more, which further erodes the city's financial base.
At the same time, the debts of the city of Dortmund now amount to around 2.6 billion euros (2020 budget).
If you add the debts of the municipal companies, the total debt of Dortmund amounts to a whopping 4.4 billion euros (consolidated financial statement 2015, published in 2018).
Every resident in Dortmund is therefore burdened with a public debt of around 7,200 euros.
Dortmund will never be able to pay off this mountain of debt on its own.
However, the absurd ideology of the "location competition" between municipalities is also partly to blame for this downward spiral: the upper class in Dortmund has the ambition to outdo other municipalities with adventurous ostentatious buildings.
Without the ongoing deficits of the concert hall, the airport, 40 million euros annually), without the interest obligations to banks and investors, which are serviced with credit-like transactions (around 60 million euros annually) and without the profit outflows from energy and water supply to a private minority shareholder (around 20 million euros annually), the city budget would have long been in debt repayment.
The Left says quite clearly: this ruinous cycle must be stopped as quickly as possible.
The main responsibility for the state of the cities lies at the federal and state level – in the socially unjust tax system, which unilaterally burdens the costs of the community on workers and small business owners and spares the rich.
The Left demands: the city of Dortmund must be more energetic in publicly advocating for ●the strict adherence to the principle “who orders, pays” (concurrency), ●a debt cut – the federal and state governments must relieve Dortmund.
In the event of an increase in interest rates, the Left demands the implementation of a debt moratorium, ●the collection of a progressive wealth tax, ●the increase of the The Left demands: An end to the privatisation of public plans and services to private investors.
“PPP models” (public-private partnership) are no longer carried out after pressure from the Left faction, but there are still so-called investor models (for example, in the construction of childcare facilities).
As soon as the childcare quota in the childcare facilities is met, this variant of credit-like transactions should also be discontinued.
The Left demands the end and a ban on all speculative transactions of the city treasury with municipal debts (for example Interest rate derivatives).
The Left stands for more income through the collection of municipal taxes and fees, which do not burden the normal and low-income earners (for example On gun ownership, mobile phone masts or gambling), instead of the previous policy of cuts.
The Left wants to secure and expand the economic activity of the municipal companies, expand investments in infrastructure.
The Left demands the abolition of road construction contributions according to the Municipal Tax Act (KAG) and thus to relieve the residents.
As a counter-financing, an equal amount must be paid by DIE LINKE demands an end to indirect subsidies for companies through the oversupply of office and commercial space.
DIE LINKE stands for a higher extraction of value increases when redeveloping building land.
Building land should, however, be kept in the hands of the city and either developed in-house or leased out in ground rent to builders.
DIE LINKE stands for the introduction of a “citizens’ budget”: the city should organise broad citizen participation in municipal investment planning as a first step towards this.
As soon as possible, the entire municipal budget should be drawn up in a regular participation process.
The participation process must include socially disadvantaged groups.
Previous attempts to involve citizens in budget consultations have been undermined by attempts at abuse by neo-Nazis.
The city’s advertising has also not been sufficient to generate sufficient interest among democratically-oriented citizens.
However, there are plenty of examples (also internationally) that show that citizens’ budgets can work if they are done properly.
Municipal services The municipal services are an important pillar of public provision for the people of Dortmund.
For example, public transport is organ The supply of electricity, gas, district heating or drinking water is provided by the municipal DEW21.
And the Sparkasse Dortmund is a bank in Dortmund that is not involved in dubious gambling and speculation.
The Left stands for public services and municipal enterprises in Dortmund.
Deficit services, which are important for the people, are subsidized by the cross-association.
Without the profits from the earnings participation, good public transport would hardly be conceivable.
The Left demands: No more passing on the losses of the airport to other municipal enterprises and thus indirectly to all Dortmunders.
The Left demands: The employees in the municipal enterprises must also be paid according to the tariff.
There must be no exceptions.
The Left wants to bring DEW21 back into full municipal ownership and end cooperation with the climate killer RWE.
Combating social poverty – creating social justice In Dortmund, a bitter geography of unemployment and poverty is emerging.
23.9 percent of Dortmunders are threatened by poverty.
This means that Dortmund has the second highest risk of poverty in Germany – after Duisburg.
Here the saying applies: “Tell me where you live and I’ll tell you what your chances are.” To this we can add: “If you are disabled, old or chronically ill, you often face insurmountable barriers.” At the end of 2018, the city of Dortmund published a report on the social situation after eleven years.
For one of the largest cities in North Rhine-Westphalia with a permanently high rate of poverty and unemployment, this long period of time for the creation of a social report is a tragedy.
In the preface of this report, it is stated, among other things: “The social report is (...) the central basis for the targeted combating of social inequality.” Social disadvantage, poverty and exclusion have been evident in Dortmund for eight years.
You only have to walk through the city centre or The social ticket is far too expensive.
But now we have a report on 172 pages – with figures and facts!
The official action plan “Social City”, which was supposed to improve living conditions in 13 particularly affected districts of poverty, unemployment and social exclusion, has relieved the disadvantaged social spaces because it is chronically underfunded and relies primarily on unpaid voluntary work by citizens.
There are more targeted handling requirements.
Social, solidarity city Dortmund is a city with a high population of families and children, migrants and senior citizens.
The Left clearly says: In a social city, all people must feel comfortable and at home.
A social, solidarity city takes care of everyone and involves everyone in public life.
A social, solidarity city must be measured by how it deals with people with low incomes.
For the Left, it is clear: A social, solidarity city Dortmund works to create and maintain jobs and employment and thus fights unemployment and poverty.
A social, solidarity city Dortmund offers demand-oriented, barrier-free and inclusive social facilities for all generations and population groups.
Social initiatives to combat poverty have many faces.
The worst faces are: hunger – homelessness – social exclusion – discrimination – drug addiction.
“Those in the dark are not seen”.
The widespread poverty is a glaring political failure.
THE LEFT clearly states: It is not the task of food banks, soup kitchens and social supermarkets to combat unemployment and poverty.
THE LEFT supports these initiatives and appreciates their commitment as a form of emergency aid.
But primarily a) a municipal employment promotion policy and b) political decisions to combat hunger and homelessness are required.
And this is necessary here and now.
Drug addiction is a social problem: THE LEFT demands the expansion of pressure rooms, drug counselling centres and the provision of food for drug-addicted homeless people.
This group of people in need especially needs publicly accessible toilets and showers.
DIE LINKE is calling for controlled diamorphine distribution to curb procurement crime.
Drug addicts do not need more controls, but a system that shows them alternatives and breaks the cycle of criminalisation.
The main cause of poverty is unemployment (see also Chapter 6.
Work).
Over 31,000 Dortmund men and women were unemployed in October 2019.
7,000 of them received unemployment benefit I; however, the majority of them had been unemployed for a long time.
If you also consider the people who are partly “parked” in measures or are supposedly too old for placement and therefore do not appear in the unemployment rate, there were a total of over 44,000 people who were considered “underemployed”.
Unemployment with all its consequences violates human dignity and can lead to a vicious circle of social problems.
This includes dependence on social benefits for a livelihood.
Over 100,000 people live in Dortmund on transfer payments.
That is one in six!
Among them are an alarming number of children, around 25,000.
They receive social assistance from their parents.
In addition, there are almost 12,000 people who are dependent on basic social security in old age (social welfare) according to SGB XII.
And about 3,000 recipients receive benefits according to the Asylum Seekers Benefits Act (as of 2017).
No to “1-Euro-Jobs”!
For the long-term unemployed, so-called “job opportunities” in the form of “1-Euro-Jobs” are provided in public and social services, in children’s, youth and senior facilities, in school support, in homework help, in escort and presence services in public spaces as well as in public cultural and leisure facilities.
These are socially useful jobs and employment, for which there is no appropriate wage and which do not lead to integration into the labor market and to a socially insured employment.
At the request of The implementation of the decision is pending.
THE LEFT rejects these “1-Euro-Jobs”.
It demands the conversion of existing and planned jobs into “regular and insured work and employment and compliance with the law on wage dumping” at a minimum hourly wage of 12 euros.
THE LEFT demands the implementation of the council decision for Nordstadt and its extension to the whole of Dortmund.
THE LEFT is committed to an active municipal labor market policy.
THE LEFT demands that sanctions and benefit cuts be completely abolished.
THE LEFT says that gas and electricity cut-offs are inhumane and demands that they be prohibited without exception.
It is incomprehensible and not socially just that the poorest are excluded from energy supply.
Municipal Election Program 2020 The city of Dortmund must be obliged to establish a municipal hardship fund that takes over the outstanding payments in the event of insolvency.
THE LEFT demands that the Dortmund Pass also includes reduced access to all Dortmund swimming pools.
For children and young people under 18, admission to all pools should be free.
For children and young people Aging in dignity in the community Good 120,000 pensioners in Dortmund are older than 65 years; over 36,000 are even older than 80 years.
With age, the risk of poverty and thus social exclusion increases.
Almost every second statutory pension in Germany (48 percent) is below 800 euros per month.
This is evident from the response of the Federal Government from 2018 to an inquiry by the LEFT in the Bundestag.
In Dortmund, 6.7 percent of people are in receipt of transfer benefits as pensioners.
For pensioners - not only for the poor - social contacts are vital.
Social isolation and loneliness make one as ill as poverty.
The LEFT clearly says: Older people enrich life like children.
A social, solidarity-based city is a city in which people of all generations meet.
To do justice to age, a broad spectrum of guarantees for self-determination, freedom and social justice is required.
This also includes the possibility of alternative forms of housing such as senior WGs or multi-generational houses The Left is committed to these alternative forms of housing.
The Left clearly states: it is a fundamental right of the elderly and the very elderly to be able to live a self-determined life in dignity and recognition.
This requires a minimum pension of 1,050 euros.
The Left clearly states: no to age discrimination – yes to the wealth of experience, competence and wealth of ideas of the elderly.
Dependency is an extremely stressful life situation.
Dependent people and their relatives, as well as care workers, need relief, support and encouragement.
People with dementia need special support and help.
The services provided by the nursing care insurance are not sufficient to cover the costs of ambulant or residential care.
Dependency remains a risk of poverty.
The Left clearly states: the elderly must be guaranteed comprehensive participation in social, cultural, political, environmental, sporting, social and leisure activities.
The Left is committed to a needs-based, area-based and quality-based offer of social and nursing care in old age.
THE LEFT demands a significantly improved staffing and financial provision for elderly care.
THE LEFT is committed to effective monitoring in homes and in home care to ensure binding standards in elderly care.
THE LEFT demands the establishment of communal home care and home care centres that are within walking distance to support those in need of care and their relatives.
THE LEFT demands the expansion of communal senior offices and social care support and care services that visit the elderly and their families.
THE LEFT clearly states: Only skilled staff should be employed in care services.
THE LEFT is committed to reducing the retirement age to 60 years.
The social city as the “city of participation” can only be achieved through direct participation, through neighbourhood assemblies, through genuine citizen participation and by taking citizens’ wishes into account at the administrative level.
The level of awareness of social support provided by the public sector must be increased.
THE LEFT demands that political participation for all citizens be simplified and made possible.
A lively community can only be achieved through the participation of citizens in the respective processes.
Removing barriers Full participation in society is a human right.
Disability is a social, not a medical construct!
Many of our fellow citizens are disabled, but above all they are prevented from participating – not only because of the often lacking barrier-free access.
The Left understands inclusion as Prof.
Dr.
Christoph Butterwegge formulated in a newspaper article: “If we understand inclusion not only as a pedagogical principle, but – in a much broader sense – as a guiding social policy concept, the goal must be an inclusive welfare state that enables equal participation of ALL in social, political and cultural life.” This process is far from complete in Dortmund.
The demands of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities from 2009 have not yet been fully implemented.
People with disabilities and chronic illnesses still face insurmountable barriers.
This starts in everyday life and at work and extends from public schools to administrations to the housing market.
Public transport is inaccessible.
Kindergartens and schools are often not disabled-friendly and barrier-free.
Participation and equal design of society is a human right.
The Left therefore This is not only about so-called disabled people.
The growing group of older people is also affected by significant and lasting impairments – and thus unequal life chances.
Description of the situation in Dortmund One of the most prominent and impressive examples of buildings is the city and state library with the surrounding cobblestones, which is difficult to navigate not only for people with mobility impairments.
Many public buildings are now barrier-free.
This does not apply to many doctors' practices, restaurants, cultural institutions, shops, etc.
Toilets are often only accessible via stairs.
Not all districts of Dortmund can be reached barrier-free with public transport.
Demands: Inclusion requires barrier-free access.
The Left demands: No new barriers from now on!
Existing barriers of all kinds in all areas of life must be energetically dismantled, including through the use of tangible sanctions in the event of non-compliance.
DIE LINKE is committed to barrier-free and inclusive kindergartens, schools, vocational schools, public and private companies.
DIE LINKE is calling for an independent central advice centre for disabled and chronically ill people, which should also include legal advice.
DIE LINKE is calling for a disabled representative in the city, who will receive a veto right against projects that are hostile to the disabled.
DIE LINKE is calling for the creation of publicly funded barrier-free living space with good connections to public transport and all relevant service providers.
DIE LINKE is committed to the dismantling of institutional structures in which disabled or elderly people live in isolation.
An alternative is the construction of inclusive multi-generational houses.
Until the completely barrier-free public transport system is implemented, DIE LINKE is proposing the use of customer advisors, as the DSW21 does in buses, also in a strengthened form in U- and streetcars.
D DIE LINKE demands more public disabled toilets.
DIE LINKE is committed to the increased use of sign language interpreters at public events.
DIE LINKE demands: ● Training for employees to raise awareness in the sense of Article 8 of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, ● Training for employees of the city administration and proactive information from the administration on the “Personal Budget”, so that people with disabilities can live, learn and work independently, ● if necessary, the issuing of documents from the administration also in Braille and easier or simpler language, so that all citizens can receive their services without help, The disabled transport service must be maintained and expanded.
The limitation of the number of free rides must be abolished.
DIE LINKE wants information and communication services, especially emergency services, to be used barrier-free.
DIE LINKE demands comprehensive barrier-free access to elections (voting location, voting procedures, voting materials, voting equipment).
The guidance systems for blind and visually impaired people in public spaces must be expanded.
DIE LINKE demands: In the awarding of municipal contracts – for example, Facilities such as workshops for people with disabilities are intended to prepare those working there for regular employment.
The Left wants to prevent them from being tied to the workshops as cheap labor in the long term.
Even people with disabilities must receive a minimum wage.
School system / Inclusion The structured school system (see also Chapter 7) prevents consistent inclusion.
Splitting children aged ten into different school types contradicts the concept of inclusion.
Many people with disabilities are still excluded: they learn in special schools, work in special workshops, travel in groups for the disabled or are accommodated in homes.
This is discrimination for those affected and a missed opportunity for the entire society.
Dignified housing for all!
Already in the 2014 municipal election program, the Left warned: Dortmund is heading for a housing shortage, especially for people with low incomes.
Around 571,000 inhabitants lived in Dortmund at the end of 2014.
Dortmund is growing.
At the end of 2018, the city estimated the main resident population at 602,566 people, distributed among a total of 317,307 households.
Of these, around 21,700 flats are in multi-storey buildings.
Over three-quarters of the households are occupied by one (49 percent) or two (28 percent) people.
Now it has been shown: the gloomy forecast has unfortunately been confirmed.
Above all, low-income households are increasingly burdened by the rising costs of basic rent and additional costs and spend over 30 percent of their monthly available money for a roof over their heads.
Between 2010 and 2018, the supply rents for flats between 60 and 80 square metres rose by 31 percent, for small flats up to 40 square metres they even rose by 50 percent in recent years.
Families with children, single parents, partners of social benefits, pensioners and students can hardly find affordable living space.
The Left is calling for affordable housing for all, because housing is a human right.
Housing means more than just a roof over your head.
An affordable home that does not endanger the health of its occupants, for example through mold, built-in hazardous substances or inadequate insulation, should be a matter of course for all residents.
The Left is calling for a social housing and urban development policy that is geared towards the needs of the residents of our city.
Decent housing is only possible in a healthy environment, where residents are not burdened by toxic substances, have access to public transport and public facilities and can maintain their social contacts in livable neighborhoods.
Housing policy has not been doing justice to this for years.
To counter the foreseeable loss of tens of thousands of socially-bound homes, we have relied on the free market since the 1980s.
Municipal housing stocks have been privatized.
Affordable housing and land have fallen into the hands of financial investors or real estate corporations such as VONOVIA, LEG or VivaWest.
Whereas there were still around 53, In the next ten years, a further 7,000 homes will fall out of the support scheme.
The Left says: the federal government, the state and the municipalities must guarantee a stock of publicly supported housing that is based on real needs.
At least 1.2 billion euros must flow into social housing support every year.
In NRW alone, 100,000 social housing units must be provided every year.
Newly built homes must remain permanently occupied and subject to price controls.
According to the current Dortmund housing market report, in 2017, only 267 new rental apartments were built with the help of state funds; in 2018, there were only 189 apartments.
Every year, Dortmund needs at least 3,000 new homes.
Private housing companies manage their properties primarily with the aim of satisfying shareholders and investors with high returns.
The profit maximisation strategy has tangible consequences for tenants.
In properties that generate little profit, even the most essential repairs and maintenance work are often not carried out.
The consequences of this strategy were seen in a dramatic way in September 2017, when The local press regularly reports on unacceptable conditions in the apartments of LEG, VONOVIA and other companies/investors.
On the other hand, their modernisation measures often lead to massive rent increases that many long-term residents cannot afford.
Incomprehensible and exorbitant operating and ancillary cost bills are a further business model of these “housing locusts”.
THE LEFT says: Necessary modernisation measures must not lead to residents being unable to afford the rent, being driven out of their familiar living environment or being at risk of losing their homes or even becoming homeless.
The municipal housing supervisory authority must take decisive action against neglect, but also against the misuse of living space (for example through the permanent private or commercial rental via platforms such as “Airbnb”).
All existing rents must be taken into account when calculating the municipal rent index.
The municipal design scope for housing policy is limited, but it does exist.
In Dortmund, THE LEFT was able to secure a share of 25 percent of socially-bound housing in new development plans for the city.
In 2018, our demands for the construction However, much more extensive efforts are necessary to preserve existing affordable housing in our city and to create new ones.
Dortmund ranks at the bottom of the NRW comparison in terms of per capita income.
More and more people work in the low-wage sector.
The underemployment rate, i.e.
the proportion of those who are involuntarily less than the "normal" working hours, is over 20 percent.
Over 14 percent of Dortmund households are over-indebted or in debt - the national rate is 10 percent.
People with negative SCHUFA reports have hardly any chance on the Dortmund housing market.
Around half of all Dortmunders have a right to a housing allowance certificate.
The housing office records an increasing number of people seeking housing every year; there are now over 2,000 households.
More and more people are seeking help because they are threatened or affected by homelessness.
Dortmund currently has around 1,400 homeless people who cannot find affordable accommodation.
It is difficult to estimate the number of people who are homeless.
The city's figures of 400 people are likely to be an underestimate.
The number of people affected is probably at least twice that.
The Left says: In order to ensure a sustainable improvement in the housing market in the lower price segment, the city must invest more in municipal housing construction.
At least 1,000 "affordable homes" must be built every year.
Overall, the city's development and housing policy must be geared more towards a non-profit housing industry.
The Left is calling for a fundamental change: The purchase of land and housing by property and financial investors must be stopped.
Land speculation must be prevented.
Existing municipal building land may only be allocated for new housing construction under the leasehold system and on terms that counteract the shortage of affordable housing.
The DOGE-WO, cooperative housing companies and other providers who are committed to sustainable social and affordable housing are to be strengthened in this way.
THE LEFT says: The rights of tenants must be strengthened; tenant initiatives must be granted the right to bring a class action.
The provisions for eviction notices must be tightened in the interests of tenants.
For recipients of social benefits, free advice and support must be guaranteed in matters of tenancy law.
THE LEFT remains firm: Private housing stocks are to be communalised wherever possible and made available to the affordable housing market segment as modernised, barrier-free municipal housing with unlimited social ties.
By enacting environmental protection bylaws, neighbourhoods threatened by “gentrification” are to be protected in order to prevent the displacement of the Dortmund residents living there and who are financially weaker.
THE LEFT continues to advocate the expropriation or socialisation of the land and housing owned by companies that do not fulfil their obligations to the common good.
Companies that allow their tenants to live in unacceptable, health-endangering conditions without providing remedies in People who have worked hard and saved to acquire their own home and have lived at the limits of their economic possibilities for many years through the repayment of their loans are often financially burdened in an unreasonable way by the contributions.
The lost income of the municipality must be compensated for in a permanent, sufficient and targeted manner by corresponding allocations from the state budget.
The 2020 municipal election programme of THE LEFT wants to ensure that the allocation of social housing, especially in the lower price segment, must be transparent and must take into account disadvantaged groups in a special way.
Recipients of social benefits according to the SGB, low-income earners, single parents, large families, households in debt and other disadvantaged people need special support so that they do not have to fear homelessness or, at worst, homelessness.
THE LEFT says: Recipients of social benefits must not be forced out of their homes by rent increases.
The benefits for the costs of accommodation must be adjusted to the development of rents in a sufficient manner.
THE LEFT has achieved in Dortmund that the adequacy limits of the accommodation costs are based on the rental Fortunately, the city has followed the request of the Fraktio n DIE LINKE to introduce a building land register for Dortmund-Huckarde as a pilot project.
The aim of such a register is to identify areas for residential construction without using open spaces that are important for nature conservation.
The areas identified in this way must be made available to social housing projects as a matter of priority.
A community that lives in solidarity is based on encounter and coexistence.
Anyone who wants a community that lives in solidarity must fight for a city development policy that guarantees this.
A social municipal housing policy that is tailored to the needs of the city's residents and that counteracts exclusion is therefore indispensable.
Anyone who wants social housing policy should therefore vote for DIE LINKE on 13 September.
4.
Climate and Environment 4.1.
Environment Preventing climate catastrophe and creating climate justice The climate crisis threatens civilisation as we know it in its very foundations.
We only have a few years left to avert a chain reaction in the Earth's climate system.
To achieve this goal, all producers of greenhouse gases must participate.
This also includes the city of Dortmund.
THE LEFT has introduced the idea of environmental justice into the remuneration systems of the Ruhr Regional Association.
Environmental pollution is usually particularly high where people with low incomes live.
THE LEFT wants to change this and protect all people from environmental pollution.
In the next few years, the creation of the Regional Plan Ruhr will be of great importance for Dortmund.
In the Dortmund Landscape Plan, THE LEFT was able to anchor many important points in the city's land use policy.
In this sense, THE LEFT will continue to work for the preservation of open spaces, clean air, clean drinking water available to all people, and a noise-free environment in the coming election period.
Dortmund has not yet achieved its climate goals.
The various areas are important: heat, electricity generation and consumption, transport, agriculture, industry and private households all contribute to climate change.
However, we must not forget the social balance of measures in all our efforts.
The Left therefore calls for a social ecological change in Germany and also in Dortmund.
The Left calls for the declaration of a climate emergency.
The situation is serious and this must also be recognised.
Climate change must be combated decisively.
The Left wants to develop more forest areas in Dortmund, protect existing forests and reforest them.
Forests store a lot of CO2.
These forests should be as natural as possible, because natural forests are not only more species-rich, but also more resistant to drought and disease than mere tree plantations for the purpose of harvesting wood.
The Left demands: Climate protection measures must not be at the expense of flora and fauna!
Municipal Election Programme 2020 The Left sees a long overdue transport revolution as a great opportunity to save many greenhouse gases.
DIE LINKE rejects the unilateral increase in the price of consumer goods.
Rules must apply to everyone.
It must not be decided over the wallet who is allowed to behave in a climate-damaging way and who is not.
The ecological footprint of the service sector is many times larger than that of the working class.
Therefore, we need more binding measures than a capitalist incentive policy through higher prices.
We therefore need climate-friendly adjustments to the consequences of climate change.
Climate change has led to the increased occurrence of extreme weather events.
Severe storms, droughts, heat waves, heavy rainfall, floods and overflooding are occurring more frequently.
The city must prepare for this.
DIE LINKE wants a constant review of the climatic effects of urban planning.
Heavy rain must not lead to overflowing drains, but must be led into rainwater collection basins and flood areas and seep into the groundwater over a longer period of time for the purpose of replenishing it.
DIE LINKE wants the concentric open space model for the fresh air supply of the city not to be constantly undermined by ever new construction measures The Left wants to preserve open spaces and is against the further sealing off of these spaces by commercial areas, parking spaces and other construction projects.
Wherever possible, sealed off areas should be reopened.
The Left wants green roofs to be the standard for new buildings.
Green roofs store water and can mitigate the effects of heavy rainfall.
In addition, they cool the environment through the evaporation of the stored water.
The Left wants to avoid heat islands and protect green spaces from development claims.
The Left demands that the environmental and climate-damaging consequences should be assessed not only in terms of their impact on Dortmund, but also in terms of their overall impact.
Open spaces should be preserved and created.
Dortmund is a large city with a high proportion of green spaces.
This is a good thing.
The Left demands that this should remain the case.
Therefore, the area fraction for motorized individual transport, home ownership and business should be immediately and permanently reduced to zero.
This is possible without any disadvantages for the city development, because the decline of the old industries has left many industrial wastelands behind.
The Left demands that these areas be sanitized and given new use.
The former users are to be called in according to the principle of the polluter pays.
New buildings must meet the requirements of urban ecology and microclimate, which must be written into the building plan.
The Left is against the privatization of public parks and inner-city open spaces such as the Fredenbaum Park or the West Park.
The management of the parks should be carried out by a newly founded Green Space Office of the city.
The inner-city parks fulfill important functions for leisure activities, but also for climate adaptation and species protection.
City Development The Left wants to use the opportunities of the large city development projects in the coming electoral period.
The International Garden Exhibition and the project of developing a new quarter for research and living on the former site of Hoesch Spundwand und Profile (HSP) have both risks and potentials.
The resettlement of the University of Applied Sciences will shape the quarter and have an impact on the surrounding area.
The Left demands: Housing and science should go hand in hand on the HSP site.
The 25 percent rule for social housing construction must be adhered to.
The Left does not want any more logistics areas on the HSP site.
Dortmund has created sufficient capacity in the logistics sector.
The Left believes that the final development stage has been reached.
The Left demands that the old sites of the Fachhochschule be secured for social housing construction.
The Left wants to use the International Garden Exhibition to develop new road connections, especially for bicycles and pedestrians.
The Left believes that a direct bicycle connection between Huckarde and Nordstadt is particularly important.
The Left says: No inter-municipal industrial and commercial area Groppenbruch.
The Left demands: No industrial areas on the Buddenacker and in the nature conservation area south of Asseln and Wickede.
Municipal Election Program 2020 DIE LINKE demands: No further development of the green belt on Steinstraße in Dortmund-Oespel.
Disposal: nicer without rubbish DIE LINKE wants to expand the waste disposal offers – when the public litter bins are constantly overfilled, then the size and emptying interval do not match the needs of the users.
Soiling in the public space must be quickly removed once it has occurred.
DIE LINKE wants to have bulky waste collected free of charge, in order to prevent wild rubbish dumps in nature and the environment.
Clean air The air in Dortmund is unhealthy.
The limit values for nitrogen dioxide are exceeded, and the values for fine dust are also high.
This can lead to respiratory problems, asthma, cardiovascular diseases and thus to premature death.
Instead of improving the situation, for example on Steinstraße, more traffic is planned through the expansion of the long-distance bus station and through additional parking spaces.
Traffic is also gladly diverted past the measured, heavily congested locations.
This only Environmental zones are to be welcomed in principle, but their effect on the polluted inner city is too weak.
In general, DIE LINKE wants to make driving bans unnecessary by adhering to the limit values.
DIE LINKE is calling for the expansion of the Ruhr environmental zone to include the Hellweg axis further to the east.
DIE LINKE is calling for air quality to be monitored at more locations.
Limit values are not measured at roads such as Mallinckrodtstraße and therefore cannot be included in traffic planning, and residents cannot be protected from pollution.
DIE LINKE is calling for an attractive public transport offer and free Park&Ride spaces to significantly relieve the inner city of cars.
In the last election period, the LINKE voted in favour of the basic decision for an emissions-free inner city.
The wall should in future be developed into a circular promenade with cafés, discos, street theatres, studios and other things.
The cycle path should be expanded on its own tracks.
Water quality Water is the most important food of all.
The water quality in Dortmund is currently quite good.
The Left welcomes the cost-intensive efforts of the responsible waterworks to renovate and modernize their facilities.
The use of particle filters – as on the Rhine – could lead to further improvements.
Industrial chemicals, medicines and microplastics do not belong in drinking water.
The Left also rejects the construction of mast installations from a groundwater protection point of view.
The Left therefore demands the renovation of the facilities and the installation of the most modern technology, as is used on the Rhine.
Most water treatment plants belong to shareholding companies of the city of Dortmund.
However, the state is also called upon to finally set a clear legal framework for renovations and to grant cost subsidies.
Many places in Dortmund have soil that is contaminated with industrial chemicals that endanger groundwater.
The Left demands soil remediation according to the principle of the polluter pays.
Existing companies must be effectively monitored and older areas must continue to be strictly controlled.
Noise prevention In the meantime, it has also been sufficiently proven by scientific studies: noise makes you sick.
The Left demands: the findings of the noise action plan must be consistently implemented.
Initially, passive noise protection devices must be implemented in heavily polluted residential areas.
In the long term, a noticeable reduction in motorized individual traffic and commercial traffic must be ensured for low noise levels.
The Left demands strict adherence to the night flight ban at Dortmund Airport.
4.2.
Ecology and biodiversity Preserving the stability of our ecosystems At the request of the Left Party, the preservation of biodiversity was established as a permanent task in the Council's climate debate.
At the same time, social impacts must always be considered.
The decline of insects, the decline of breeding birds and the decline of native tree species in Dortmund also provide enough reason to be concerned about the stability of our ecosystems.
The mass occurrence of individual species such as the European processionary moth or the bark beetle is an indication of problematic developments.
DIE LINKE demands: Protected areas in the city should be consistently designated as nature reserves or landscape conservation areas.
Existing protected areas should be networked and secured through urban ecological measures (example: the biotope connection between the nature reserve Grop-penbruch and the renatured Herrentheyer Bach in Dortmund-Mengede).
DIE LINKE wants to designate significantly more areas for natural forest development in Dortmund's nature reserves in the future.
Commercial forest management with intensive timber utilisation carries the risk of the death of entire forest areas in times of climate change.
DIE LINKE would like to use the International Garden Exhibition (IGA) in 2027 to create green connections between the north and south of Dortmund along the renatured course of the Emscher.
DIE LINKE would like to subject the effectiveness of ecological compensation measures to greater control.
The compensation should take place in the immediate vicinity of the measure to be relocated.
Urban e The Left is also seeking a similar regulation for so-called stone gardens, which should be converted back into unsealed, ecologically meaningful areas in the future.
The Left is seeking the de-sealing of areas in favour of the groundwater house.
The Left is calling for a programme for the greening of facades in the inner city.
The Left wants to significantly increase the number of street trees.
A leaf roof cools the streets and provides fresh air.
When selecting the street trees, different types of trees should be mixed to counteract the spread of pests.
Care should be taken to plant climate-resistant species.
The Left is calling for the use of municipal staff, such as the fire department, to supply street trees with the necessary water during dry periods.
If the current droughts become a long-term trend, fixed irrigation systems should be installed.
The Left is calling for at least three replacement trees to be planted for every tree that is cut down in the street.
THE LEFT is calling for a programme to settle birds and bats in urban green spaces and parks by providing nesting aids and overnight accommodation.
Areas for wildflowers should be provided, which can serve as a food source for animals.
THE LEFT wants to continue to support the renaturisation and protection of waterways.
THE LEFT wants to preserve the Frerichswiese in Dorstfeld.
Green Belt Dortmund-East In the east of Dortmund, the largest natural area of Dortmund is located with an outstanding variety of species.
THE LEFT is calling for a nature and leisure area in Dortmund-East.
The existing areas of Wickeder Ostholz, Wickeder Westholz, Buschei / Alte Körne, Kurler Busch up to the Lanstroper See should be sensibly connected through reforestation and landscape conservation measures.
The previous electoral period shows that THE LEFT has achieved a lot.
The Pleckenbrinksee, which is important for bird protection, has been placed under nature conservation.
However, there are also threats to nature and leisure areas in the east of Dortmund, such as The planned construction of the L663n motorway (OW IIIa).
This was also shown in 2013 by the conflict over the Kurl sports field, the black kites in the Buschei/Alte Körne nature reserve and the upcoming commercial areas in Kurl.
The position of the LEFT was recognized as correct by all parties to the conflict afterwards.
The successful campaign for new changing rooms for the affected football club in 2018 shows that the LEFT also continues to support projects in the long term.
The fight for the black kite at the time ensured the preservation of the rare birds of prey in Westphalia.
The LEFT demands the permanent protection of the Buschei and Alte Körne nature reserves in the Scharnhorst district.
Construction on the edge of the nature reserves must be avoided.
The LEFT demands that no facilities for mass animal husbandry be allowed.
The planned bull fattening facility on Greveler Straße is a deterrent example as a barrier between two nature reserves.
The Dortmund farmers should be oriented towards ecological agriculture.
DIE LINKE wants to promote green field borders for biotope networking.
DIE LINKE demands the development of an inter-municipal nature conservation offer with the city of Kamen, including Wickeder Ostholz and Pleckenbrinksee.
DIE LINKE stands on the side of the nature conservation associations, which have long been calling for an end to hunting in NRW.
Killing wild animals is, as a rule, an intervention in the natural balance.
Forest and fields are not areas for animal husbandry.
DIE LINKE rejects winter feeding for red deer.
DIE LINKE demands a year-round hunting ban in nature conservation areas and protected landscapes.
DIE LINKE does not want to radically shoot black pigs to keep them out of the Dortmund city area, as is currently the case.
Instead, gentle methods of scaring should be used where black pigs can cause damage.
The use of chili, for example, keeps even the toughest boar away.
4.3.
Energy Energy must be affordable and environmentally friendly Energy transition THE LEFT wants the use of fossil fuels to be phased out as quickly as possible.
This must begin with lignite and then with hard coal.
Finally, the operation of gas-fired power plants or even those using imported liquid gas (LNG from fracking) must also be ended as quickly as possible.
The energy transition can only succeed if the political preconditions, in particular the laws of the federal government and the states and other regulatory policy frameworks, fundamentally change.
This would also open up new measures in the municipal area.
Nevertheless, even municipal politics must already exploit all possibilities that open the way to 100 percent renewable energy.
Energy transition in Dortmund THE LEFT demands that all municipal political decisions be oriented towards the goal of achieving a complete withdrawal from the fossil energy industry by 2030.
Replacement jobs must be created for all jobs that are lost as a result.
DEW21 should increase the proportion of self-generated electricity and the proportion of renewable energy as much as possible, with the goal of becoming climate-neutral as quickly as possible.
Decentralised solutions should be preferred in this context in order to minimise transport losses and thus achieve a high level of efficiency.
The development of solar energy and the construction of (decentralised) storage facilities can play an important role in this.
However, it is crucial that the legal restrictions that stand in the way of the construction of neighbourhood storage facilities and the mass development of tenant power models are finally lifted.
The great potential of solar energy that is offered by the roofs of urban buildings and municipal facilities must be utilised quickly and comprehensively.
The installation of solar panels must also be promoted on private buildings.
The passive house standard must be pursued in new construction.
The improvement of the energy balance must also be promoted in existing buildings, for example through the use of regenerative energy sources.
The Left Party supports the strategy of building a district heating supply for Dortmund.
This should be based on renewable energy sources as quickly as possible, including the use of industrial waste heat.
The Left Party is committed to the introduction of a vocational school for future energies at the vocational college, so that young people in Dortmund can qualify for the use of these new technologies.
Energy must remain affordable More and more people can no longer afford the energy prices.
THE LEFT demands that there must be no forced disconnections of energy and water supplies due to payment arrears.
We acknowledge that DEW21 has done a lot in recent times to avoid forced disconnections.
Further measures are required to relieve private households with low incomes.
This includes the fact that the relief of large consumers must stop, which is paid for by ordinary consumers.
DEW21 should examine the possibilities of keeping the costs for basic consumption low through a progressive tariff structure and of placing a correspondingly greater burden on households with higher needs.
However, we know that these possibilities are limited due to competition with private energy providers.
Even if legal regulations could help here, everything speaks in favour of taking the energy supply out of the hands of private large corporations and making them public companies.
Re-municipalisation of DEW21 THE LEFT is in favour of the complete re-municipalisation of the Dortmund energy supply.
Although political pressure was able to increase the municipal share in DEW21 from 53 to 60.1 percent in 2014.
The previous increase in their share was a profitable investment for the municipal utilities.
But that is not enough!
We reject any participation of private energy companies (such as RWE, Innogy or Eon) in DEW21.
The Left demands that DEW21 be transferred to 100 percent municipal ownership!
Municipal Election Program 2020 The Left demands the immediate sale of the 23.6 million RWE shares held by the municipal utilities.
RWE has integrated the entire power generation sector into its own power plant park.
It will try to continue operating its coal-fired power plants for as long as possible and then have them decommissioned with outrageously high compensation from the public budget.
The Dortmund municipal utilities must not be complicit in this despicable game.
This also applies to the disgraceful complicity between RWE and the state government, particularly in connection with the Hambach Forest.
The Left demands that the phase-out of nuclear energy be completed according to plan.
Castor containers carrying highly radioactive material are driving around Dortmund in the direction of the uranium enrichment plant in Gronau in Westphalia.
A heavily used railway line through Lünen leads up to four kilometres to the Dortmund city limits.
In the event of an accident, there is a risk to life.
The transported uranium hexafluoride can become highly toxic hydrofluoric acid when it comes into contact with water.
The Left is calling for the cessation of these transports of radioactive material.
Instead, we demand the closure of the plant in Gronau and all other plants that process nuclear fuels or other materials suitable for the production of nuclear weapons (including for export).
5.
Transport and Mobility Mobility is a public good Whether in the city, the suburbs or rural areas: mobility and the ability to move as freely and quickly as possible in public spaces is not only necessary for the daily commute to work, family or businesses.
It is also a central prerequisite for social participation.
Anyone who wants to access culture, public spaces or meeting places with other people must first find a way there.
Mobility should be recognised as a public good in this sense.
This should be available to all people without restriction.
Appropriate and well-coordinated mobility is a decisive prerequisite for a functioning city.
Public space is available to all road users equally.
The necessary traffic must make room for real urbanity, life and living in the city.
Public transport for all Public transport forms the basic framework of a functioning mobility.
It is low in emissions, space-saving and can be accessible to all people.
However, it must become more cost-effective.
In addition, the connections must be improved and the frequency increased.
This way, public transport can become a real, attractive alternative to the car.
This is a significant lever for reducing CO2 emissions.
The Left is committed to free public transport for all.
The first steps have been taken - with free tickets for children, young people, students and trainees, because the obligation to attend school also entails the right to travel to the place of training.
Even adults with little money have major restrictions on their mobility, as the cost of a social ticket is significantly higher than the planned rate for mobility.
The Left demands: The transport network must be massively expanded, particularly in areas outside the inner city.
The Left wants a higher frequency and extension of travel times.
It must also be possible to travel to work by bus and train at the start of a shift at the weekend.
The Left demands that all stops in Dortmund must be barrier-free.
This includes not only the construction of lifts and ramps, but also a complete system of blind guides and announcements.
The Left demands that the lines between the Ruhr cities be expanded.
The Ruhr area is a metropolitan region, and the public transport network should be adapted to this size.
Traveling by public transport should not only be possible via the hubs at the main train stations, but also between the individual neighborhoods of the various cities.
DIE LINKE considers the merger of the transport associations in NRW to be a good idea, as this will make it possible to plan in a more coordinated way.
More cycling Cycling is the most environmentally friendly way of getting around.
In the city, cycling offers great potential, as many of the distances covered are less than five kilometres.
Cycling is a fair form of mobility.
Even children and, with the advent of the e-bike, people with physical disabilities can use this means of transport.
At the moment, the proportion of cycling is only around six percent of the distances covered.
The main reasons for this are a lack of safety and comfort due to the high volume of car traffic.
Cycling must be given priority over motorised individual transport (MIV).
Only in this way can Dortmund get rid of its dirty air and constant noise.
DIE LINKE is calling for the expansion of cycle paths not only to the centres, but throughout the entire city area.
Cycle paths must not be patchwork or zigzag routes.
The Left wants its own cycle streets and cycle priority streets as well as wide cycle lanes (at least 1.85 metres) with a safety distance from parked cars.
At intersections, there needs to be separate green phases and green waves for cyclists.
The Left demands more cycle parking spaces and charging facilities for e-bikes.
In new buildings, cycle parking spaces must take priority over cars.
The Left is calling for more checks and harsher punishment for wrong parking on cycle and footpaths and in intersections.
The Left is calling for more free Park&Ride spaces outside the inner city with a free connection to public transport.
The Left is calling for dangerous places – such as cycle paths that suddenly lead onto the road – to be rebuilt with a view to the safety of cyclists.
Fatal accidents on bikes often also involve HGVs turning right.
The number of HGVs in the city must be reduced.
The necessary HGVs must be equipped with turning assistants.
At the places where accidents have occurred, the section of road must be changed.
The Left wants to ensure that no cycle path is removed at construction sites.
Cyclists must be protected by their own barriers, just like pedestrians.
Restrictions may only be imposed at the expense of car traffic.
Existing laws must be applied here.
The Left wants the free transport of bicycles, cargo bikes and bicycle trailers in public transport.
The possibilities for transport must be improved.
More rights for pedestrians.
Everyone who uses the road is at least sometimes a pedestrian.
Children, young people, many senior citizens and those who cannot afford a car are always pedestrians.
All others walk at least part of the way.
According to the Modal Split, the proportion of people walking in Dortmund is surprisingly high.
Nevertheless, many short distances are unnecessarily driven instead of walked.
Noisy, unshaded, unpleasant streets, bad air and unfriendly pedestrian crossings with long, often separate waiting times have a deterrent effect and make people resort to cars.
As a result, the number of cars increases, urban areas become deserted, the noise level rises, the air gets worse, the inner-city and global climate are affected.
A city of pedestrian-friendly paths keeps space for pedestrians, goes against blocked paths, ensures safe, comfortable and adequately fast progress.
This includes functional lighting, shading, as well as zebra crossings or quickly reacting traffic lights.
The aim is also occasional places to rest as well as offers for playful transportation for children.
THE LEFT demands the creation of spaces with quality of stay through seating, lighting, greenery and noise reduction.
The area within the walls and Münsterstraße should become a car-free zone.
THE LEFT wants every pedestrian crossing to be able to be crossed in a green phase by people with walking difficulties.
THE LEFT demands the expansion of the 30 km/h zones, more play streets and more zebra crossings.
The sidewal Rheinische Straße).
Parking on the pavement should not be tolerated.
THE LEFT wants more controls of air pollution through additional measuring devices.
Goods transport from the streets away.
Even in Dortmund, about a fifth of the air pollutants generated by road traffic are accounted for by lorry traffic.
A sustainable transport revolution is therefore unavoidable, to revolutionise inner-city goods transport from ground up.
Dortmund is completely surrounded by a motorway ring, which could significantly relieve inner-city traffic policy – if those responsible wanted it and used it consistently.
THE LEFT demands the consistent relocation of lorry through traffic from the city area to the railways and, where this is not possible, to the motorway.
THE LEFT welcomes the fact that the driving ban for lorries over 7.5 tonnes on the B1 in the Dortmund city area will finally be implemented in 2020, a ban that has been demanded by THE LEFT for years.
THE LEFT is in favour of expanding the environmental zone to reduce heavy traffic throughout the city area.
More staff must be employed for the controls.
Municipal Election Programme 2020.
THE LEFT demands THE LEFT stands for the strengthening of the regional (circular) economy to minimize delivery routes.
THE LEFT aims for a low-pollution link between transport and logistics systems on roads, railways and waterways.
New small-scale (semi-) automatic transport systems are to be further tested and promoted for delivery traffic within pedestrian zones.
THE LEFT is against the further construction of the OWIIIa towards Asseln and Wickede.
THE LEFT demands the preservation and expansion of waterways for inland shipping as a more environmentally friendly alternative to truck and air freight traffic.
THE LEFT stands by the importance of the Dortmund port as an important part of the municipal infrastructure.
It must remain in public hands.
THE LEFT says: The expansion of the container terminal is sensible.
However, a comprehensive traffic concept is required to minimize noise and exhaust emissions for residents.
The residential areas should be granted protection of their existing status based on the planned upgrading of their district.
Deconstruction of the airport The Dortmund airport is one of the worst environmental sins in the city area.
Per passenger kilometer, flying is even more damaging to the climate than driving and is significantly more damaging than taking the train.
In Germany, CO2 emissions from air traffic have doubled since 1990.
However, airlines and airports are still often subsidized with tax exemptions and public subsidies compared to other modes of transport.
The Dortmund airport is driving the increase in air traffic at the expense of other airports in the region with its low-cost airline concept.
Nevertheless, the Dortmund airport makes losses in the tens of millions of euros every year.
These losses can be passed on to the entire population of the city through loss compensation by the Dortmund municipal utilities – even though only a minority of the population uses the airport.
Since 2004, the airport has been expanded to become a tourism airport.
This was only possible because low-cost airlines were attracted with dumping prices for takeoff and landing fees.
Nevertheless, the beneficiaries of the airport are striving for even further expansion.
DIE LINKE is against these plans.
The aim of DIE LINKE is to develop environmentally and climate-friendly mobility without the use of fossil fuels.
This includes the phasing out of kerosene-powered air travel.
The argument of jobs is often used to justify the maintenance of the airport.
The fact is: the airport does not offer more jobs than other logistics companies of comparable investment size.
DIE LINKE demands the immediate end of subsidies by the municipal utilities and the immediate obligation of the airport to charge cost-covering take-off and landing fees.
DIE LINKE is working towards the goal of closing the airport.
An intermediate step could be the conversion to a business airport.
DIE LINKE insists on a strict night flight ban from 10 p.m.
to 6 a.m.
For this reason, the council group has supported a lawsuit against the extension of operating hours and commissioned a specialist report.
The illegality of the operating hours extension into the night flight area, which was applied for by the airport and approved by the district government, was established in court.
In addition, the airport has made further attempts to disturb people's night's rest.
The Left is against the expansion of the runway and the expansion of freight traffic at the airport.
Freight belongs on the railways and on the water.
The Left wants the employees to be taken on by other municipal companies when the airport is dismantled.
Automobile traffic.
Public space belongs to everyone.
The fact is, however, that it is largely designed for automobile traffic and dominated by it.
The construction and maintenance of roads, parking spaces and parking garages is expensive.
Many of them are financed from taxes.
Despite this, cyclists and pedestrians often have a dangerous, at least uncomfortable existence on the fringes, in contrast to motorized road users.
This is particularly dangerous for particularly young or elderly road users.
All citizens suffer under the traffic infarction of inner cities: motorised individual transport (MIT) is also one of the most important emitters of the climate gas CO2.
A simple conversion to electric mobility is not a solution.
The density of vehicles does not decrease and emissions are outsourced to other regions.
The city of Dortmund should not only consider regional emissions when converting to electric mobility, but also the total emissions, including those during production.
Public transport must be comprehensively expanded and rates must be increased.
New low-emission vehicles must be purchased.
Cycling and pedestrian paths and traffic-calmed zones must be created, especially in the inner city area.
Parking spaces for cars must be expanded as Park&Ride parking lots.
The goal is a largely car-free inner city.
This means: no new roads, instead, the return of existing roads, speed limits and a reduction of the areas reserved for parking.
For those traffic flows that cannot be shifted to public transport and non-motorised vehicles, electric mobility is justifiable, provided that the number of these vehicles and their weight is low and the materials required for them are obtained in a fair manner.
Economic policy must be employment policy.
The main cause of poverty is unemployment.
Over 31,000 women and men in Dortmund were unemployed in October 2019.
7,000 of them received unemployment benefits I; however, most of those affected were long-term unemployed (see Chapter 2.
Social Issues).
The unemployment rate in Dortmund is still around ten percent.
If we also consider the people who are partly “parked” in measures or are supposedly too old for placement and therefore do not appear in the unemployment rate, there were a total of over 44,000 people who were considered “underemployed”.
In addition, around 50,000 people were employed in low-paid jobs.
Unemployment with all its consequences violates human dignity and leads to a vicious circle of social problems.
This includes dependence on welfare benefits for a livelihood.
Over 100,000 people, not just the unemployed, are dependent on transfer payments in Dortmund!
One of the most pressing problems is long-term unemployment.
Its share of the unemployed is over 75 percent.
For the long-term unemployed, Dortmund, like many other municipalities, offers employment opportunities, among other things, through “1-Euro jobs” and through the city’s “Communal Labour Market Strategy 2020-2030” using the “Participation Act”.
Although the corresponding wage is paid and there is the possibility of employment for up to five years, the chance of being taken on afterwards is more than uncertain.
In addition, social insurance benefits do not provide contributions to unemployment insurance, so that after five years of employment – without subsequent employment – there is a return to Hartz IV.
There are also only slight chances of participating in further education.
Tariff-based benefits, such as Christmas and holiday pay, which go beyond the wage, cannot be claimed.
The activities take place mainly in public and social services, in child, youth and senior facilities, in school support, homework help, in escort and presence services in public spaces and in public cultural and leisure facilities - work and employment that helps and benefits people.
These are all socially useful jobs and employment, of which the city of Dortmund should create many more.
This could be achieved by converting the "1-Euro-Jobs" into employment relationships subject to social insurance - paid at the rate of the collective agreement and with contributions to the unemployment insurance.
At the request of the LEFT, the Nordstadt concept of the Council decided to convert all "1-Euro-Jobs" in the Nordstadt into employment relationships subject to social insurance.
However, the implementation of the decision has been delayed by the administration for years.
THE LEFT rejects "1-Euro-Jobs"!
It demands the conversion of existing and planned "1-Euro-Jobs" or comparable measures into "regular and socially insured work and employment and compliance with the law on collective agreements" at a hourly wage of at least 12 euros THE LEFT demands the implementation of the above-mentioned council decision for Nordstadt and its expansion to the whole of Dortmund.
THE LEFT stands for publicly financed programmes for the socially insured employment of the unemployed and especially the long-term unemployed and for an apprenticeship programme for young unemployed people without vocational training.
Economic development The development of the economy is not to the advantage of our city.
With old strategies, economic development will also miss its targets in the future.
It will not be able to stop the social division of the city society into a narrow wealthy upper class and a large mass of people who are cut off from the structural change.
The wrong way is a dumping competition of cities for the lowest fees and corporate taxes.
THE LEFT stands for an economy oriented towards the common good and demands the expansion and strengthening of the cooperative economy and the cooperative spirit.
THE LEFT demands that subsidies and services to private companies are linked to binding and enforceable job promises.
The benefits are to be reclaimed if the promises are not kept.
Against poverty wages: minimum wage of 1 Wages in the low-wage sector and for precarious workers are not enough to secure an existence even with full-time work.
One in four Hartz IV recipients is a so-called "up-skiller".
The Left demands a minimum wage of 12 euros per hour.
The Left clearly states: people in employment and their families must be able to live off their wages.
The so-called underemployment rate is always well over 13 percent.
This includes over 3,000 Hartz IV recipients over the age of 58.
The Left demands that the public sector also finds solutions for older Hartz IV recipients.
A central goal of politics must be to offer all people good work and to reduce long-term unemployment.
However, the employment strategy of the city of Dortmund is characterised by a multitude of temporary projects and short-term offers that work against each other.
The strategy unilaterally pursues the goal of supplying the labour market with well-trained but cheap workers.
The short-term nature of the projects and measures creates uncertainty for those affected.
The conditions under which the economy demands workforce are not questioned at all.
The Left demands the creation of permanent, good, full-time and socially insured jobs for the long-term unemployed.
Instead of supplying companies with cheap skilled workers, the city of Dortmund must also insist on the improvement of working conditions.
The existing support and training offers must not lead to precarious employment for social educators, lecturers, etc.
The Left demands the creation of a permanent municipal educational institution in order to offer qualifications and educational opportunities around the employment strategy from a single source, without having to rely on temporary staff and unreliable third-party providers.
The Left demands: Away with Hartz IV.
The Left is in favor of a sanction-free minimum security of 1,050 euros per month.
Public services and institutions provide for existence.
Social security and social justice require well-developed public services and public ownership of essential natural and cultural goods.
Chapter 1.
Finances).
DIE LINKE is calling for the prevention of further privatisation of public services and the reversal of privatisations that have already taken place.
Sparkassen must remain as public institutions in order to guarantee credit to small and medium-sized enterprises.
Municipal and non-profit providers should be supported in order to create secure jobs in social, cultural and ecological areas.
New businesses should be tied to the creation of jobs.
DIE LINKE says: Land consumption for automated warehouses without workers is a dead end.
DIE LINKE fundamentally rejects private-public partnership projects.
Strengthening the public service The city of Dortmund, together with its subsidiaries and affiliated companies, is by far the largest local employer.
Accordingly, it has a high level of responsibility for employment in the local area.
However, the ideology of a “lean state” in combination with the drying up of municipal finances is one of the main causes of unemployment.
The Left advocates an efficient administration.
Municipal rationalisation projects must not create even more unemployment.
On the other hand, municipal enterprises must be expanded.
Their business models must ensure full democratic control by the council and its committees.
The Left is clearly in favour of strengthening the public service as the largest employer and in the interests of public services.
The persistence and constant follow-up have paid off: at the request of the left-wing council group, the training quota in the town administration has doubled!
This upward trend must continue.
Local elections programme 2020 The Left says: enough with unnecessary fixed-term contracts in the town administration and the municipal facilities.
The Left rejects fixed-term contracts without a valid reason.
The Left does not support the outsourcing of staff to so-called service companies and wage dumping and "wage dumping".
The Left demands that employees must be continuously further qualified so that they can also cope with future tasks.
The Left rejects the introduction of Saturday and Sunday work.
The Left stands for a policy of full employment.
That is why the Left demands a 35-hour week and, in the long term, a 30-hour week with full staff and wage compensation in order to create jobs and distribute existing work among all employees.
The Left sees the city administration as a role model for the economy.
7.
Children, youth and school Free good education for all – already for toddlers Despite the legal entitlement to a childcare place for children from the age of one that has existed since 2013, reliable, good full-day care places in childcare facilities are still in short supply.
Rising birth rates have also led to the fact that the childcare quota cannot be met despite the U3 place expansion.
There are too few childcare places, especially for children under three, and especially parents of young children are fobbed off Most parents would prefer a Kitap latz for their children from the beginning.
The reasons are the higher reliability and therefore better compatibility with work and the advantages of early childhood education, which is considered high-quality day care for children in Kitas.
DIE LINKE says: We demand publicly funded, local and well-equipped Kitaplaces for all children whose parents wish for them, from the beginning.
DIE LINKE demands the expansion of childcare places with a group size of a maximum of 15 children and a care ratio of one educator per five children.
DIE LINKE says: a clear NO to Kitaplace sharing.
DIE LINKE demands Kitaneubau by municipal building contractors instead of private investors, to whom no land allocation should take place.
Expensive rental contracts with investors should be put under scrutiny.
DIE LINKE says clearly: The legal claim of the child to day care applies regardless of the employment status of the parents.
The parental wish should be met as much as possible.
Unemployed families should not be systematically referred to 25-hour places or to the end of the waiting lists in Kitas and day care DIE LINKE stands for the abolition of kitabeiträge nationwide.
As long as this is not realised, DIE LINKE wants to introduce contribution regulations that exempt children of the unemployed, single parents, refugees and low-income earners and only apply them to middle incomes.
DIE LINKE demands a free and high-quality food supply for all children.
At least one vegetarian or vegan menu should be offered daily.
DIE LINKE therefore wants to maintain the catering kitchens of the FABIDO kitas.
DIE LINKE also stands for a kita health service in which specialists support children with health problems and initiate preventive measures after consultation and support for the parents.
Day care for children in day care DIE LINKE is in favour of expanding day care places close to home and reducing day care places according to the wishes of the parents.
DIE LINKE demands the raising of qualification standards in day care as well as the binding use of specialists in large day care facilities.
DIE LINKE wants to significantly expand the qualification of day care parents and improve the professional support of day care parents by the youth office The rights of children and young people DIE LINKE stands for the special support of children's and youth facilities in socially disadvantaged districts.
Self-managed spaces (alternative and youth centers) should be strengthened.
Appropriate offers should have sufficient personnel and material resources with more structural and less project funding.
DIE LINKE stands for the special support of barrier-free playgrounds that are participatively designed by children and young people.
This also includes open spaces as casual meeting places for young people.
DIE LINKE demands: The use of sports fields, halls and swimming pools must be possible regardless of membership in a club.
Municipal swimming pools with low entrances or free admission and free use of sports facilities must be preserved.
DIE LINKE wants to maintain and expand free holiday activities and low-cost holiday camps.
DIE LINKE clearly says: The support for education, especially preventive offers such as counseling for children and young people, must be expanded.
Target group-specific information for children, young people and families about all support and counseling services must be strengthened.
School: Good education for all – free and public education is a human right – a right that every child is entitled to, regardless of social status and income of the parents.
Education policy is connected to a wide range of social problems: opportunities in the job market, income, integration, cultural participation and the use of political rights depend on the level of education and its distribution in society.
This means that even children of parents without a residence permit must be schooled.
No one is illegal.
In Dortmund, the social division of the city is particularly obvious in the education gap between affluent and poor districts.
The chances of a higher education degree and thus participation in social life are extremely unequally distributed.
In the southern districts, twice as many children go to grammar school as in the north.
This is not because the children in the north are dumber.
The educational injustice goes hand in hand with social exclusion through financial poverty and unemployment.
The multi-level school system leads to an early selection of children, disadvantaging children from families without education and children with a migration background.
The Left says without ifs and buts: Equal good education for all children regardless of the income of their parents.
The Left says clearly: No privatization of educational institutions.
The Left condemns the subordination of the education system to the economy.
Sponsoring and advertising at schools must be banned.
No interference by global corporations or the Bundeswehr.
Language promotion from the beginning The Left demands language promotion programs from the daycare center to vocational school.
Parents must be included in language education, especially parents with a migration background.
Further expansion of the comprehensive school system The Left fights for the conversion of the multi-tiered school system.
The Left demands a comprehensive school model from the 1st to the 12th/13th grade.
Classes in joint instruction.
The Left demands: In order to make joint learning possible for children with and without disabilities, the standard that the primary schools have must be implemented in all schools.
This means: a maximum of twelve children in the class, two teachers, one of whom is a special needs teacher, as well as a teacher or social pedagogue.
There must be a sufficient space concept with retreat or rest rooms and bathrooms for nursing care.
Under these conditions, joint learning can succeed.
The Left considers the preservation of special needs schools to be necessary.
The right of parents of children with disabilities to choose must be maintained.
The Left demands the assumption of the costs of learning and teaching materials in school, training and study and a free student ticket for public transport.
The Left says no to overcrowded classrooms, stressed teachers and poor teaching!
It demands the reduction of class sizes to 18 pupils as a first step towards 12 pupils, as well as the employment of well-trained and well-paid teaching and support staff by the state.
The Left clearly says: Short legs – short distances – no closure of smaller primary schools until there is comprehensive 12/13-year secondary schooling.
The Left demands that school social work must be stabilised and expanded.
The implementation of the OGS is regulated by framework contracts of the judiciary with social service providers, welfare associations and churches.
The employment of support staff in the OGS and the support services is often precarious.
The Left is committed to a comprehensive after-school system in all primary and secondary schools.
Municipal Election Programme 2020 The Left demands the expansion of the OGS with qualified paedagogical support including remedial teaching for disadvantaged and disabled children.
The Left is committed to parent-free after-school care including a healthy school meal.
The Left clearly says: Reliable THE LEFT is committed to framework agreements which oblige the providers of OGS to enter into employment contracts with the care staff, with wage-based, socially insured employment.
THE LEFT demands that the backlog in the renovation of schools be cleared up quickly.
Vocational training THE LEFT demands an offensive training support programme for young people with a Hauptschulabschluss or without a school-leaving certificate.
THE LEFT demands a training placement levy for all companies which do not or do not sufficiently (less than ten percent of trainees among employees) provide training, in order to finance a public training programme.
THE LEFT demands the expansion of the variety of training courses at Berufskollegs.
8.
Health For a healthy and social city The health service is an original task of the public sector and must no longer be subject to economic interests.
THE LEFT fights for comprehensive and needs-oriented nursing, medical and therapeutic care: • human and of high quality • outpatient and inpatient • for young and old • culturally sensitive and barrier-free Market and competition are not suitable instruments for controlling the health Therefore, we want to reverse the privatisation and commercialisation of the last few years.
The healthcare sector in Dortmund includes eleven hospitals, around 1,000 general practitioners and specialists, several public and private emergency services, hundreds of care and support facilities and services.
In total, around 40,000 people are employed in the social security system in all areas.
Accordingly, this sector is the largest employer in the region with a share of almost 20 percent.
However, in North Rhine-Westphalia alone, there was a shortage of around 14,000 care workers for the elderly last year.
In view of the reduction in care places in the past, there is currently also a shortage of care staff in Dortmund hospitals.
In 2018, Dortmund hospitals pointed out that the staffing situation in the intensive care unit was no longer sufficient in some cases.
More staff, especially in nursing, is urgently needed.
The Left is calling for a qualification offensive for the training of nursing staff in all clinics and care and support facilities in public ownership in Dortmund, For this reason, DIE LINKE believes that it is necessary to improve occupational safety through regular risk assessments and related measures.
Only in this way can the current nursing shortage be sustainably combated.
Humane hospital care instead of factory-style care The Dortmund Clinic is the second largest municipal hospital in the Federal Republic, the largest municipal hospital in NRW and a so-called maximum care provider.
Even though the clinic has been able to produce budget surpluses in recent years, the debts of around 30 million euros are still very high.
DIE LINKE is very concerned that the construction of the outdated children's clinic will increase the debt burden to an unbearable level.
DIE LINKE will do everything in its power to ensure that the Dortmund City Council uses all the options available to it to ensure that the necessary investments are fully covered.
At present, the state government intends to significantly reduce the number of the 350 hospitals in North Rhine-Westphalia.
This will be achieved through mergers, specialization and cooperation.
Affected will be mainly cities with a high density of hospitals.
This includes Dortmund in particular.
Municipal Election Programme 2020 In order to avoid leaving the reduction in beds in the hospital plan 2022 solely to the providers and the health insurance companies, DIE LINKE considers it imperative to manage this process democratically, that is to say in a participatory manner.
DIE LINKE proposes the creation of a hospital conference, in which all affected groups participate, including the trade unions represented in the health sector.
The objectives of care should be determined there, and in what form the existing facilities can contribute to their implementation.
Cost reduction must not be the primary goal.
Care and support Assuming that in a few years 25 percent of the total population in Germany will require age-related care and support in their everyday lives, the municipalities are also facing very great challenges, which must be addressed now.
There can be no “business as usual”.
All offers must be designed in such a way that the person in need of care and/or support can remain in their local area and not be torn out of their social environment, whether in the city or in the countryside, whether ambulatory or stationary.
The new classification of care requirements into five care levels, which now makes it possible to take account of the needs of the mentally ill in staff planning, is also helping to achieve this.
Demands:  The additional staff previously employed to care for mentally ill residents must be fully integrated into the new staff planning.
 Residential care facilities for the young and old must be located close to public transport and be easily accessible.
 The ambulant and residential palliative care services must be expanded to meet demand.
 Culturally sensitive care concepts must be developed.
 The transfer of ownership of a residential and care home must be re-nationalised.
 The municipal authorities must be responsible for new buildings.
 Municipal care services must be established.
Short-term care facilities If care at home is not possible for a certain period of time, professional short-term care offers the care-dependent person the opportunity to receive residential care.
Often relatives take on the care work – sometimes beyond their own limits.
If the caregivers fall ill or require relief, the care-dependent person needs a place in short-term care ( Good day care supports individuals in their daily routine, creates social contacts, offers stimulating leisure activities and counteracts the tendency to isolation.
The Left supports day care that is based on multi-generational concepts.
Demands:  Needs-oriented and local day care facilities for young and old – especially in the outer districts of Eving, Lütgendortmund and Huckarde, which are currently under-supplied,  Outreach counselling,  Municipal leisure activities for people with support needs.
Home care in public hands Ambulant or home-based nursing care is an instrument of nursing and nursing care in the living environment of people in need of care.
Often privately run and profit-oriented, it is an instrument of nursing and nursing care in the living environment of people in need of care.
Demands:  Inclusion of ambulant services in the binding care plan of the municipalities and districts,  Ambulant care for the elderly and sick in public hands.
In general: As far as the municipality fulfils public welfare Municipal living environment and networked action can drive and ensure prevention in neighbourhoods and districts for different target groups.
Understanding prevention as a municipal cross-sectional task is the way to bring health care from reaction to action and to ensure social spaces with high quality of life.
9.
Equality and gender justice Equality is not yet working Despite formal gender equality, women* are still exposed to many different forms of discrimination.
Women still earn significantly less than men and do more unpaid care work.
Women are still less trusted, they still hit the “glass ceiling” and are still underrepresented in management levels.
Structural disadvantages are a reality everywhere.
The task of politics must be to counter these forms of discrimination and to enable all people to develop freely.
Local politics must develop offers for different lifestyles.
This includes lifestyles of LGBTIQ* (lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans, inter, queer), but also heterosexual lifestyles beyond marriage.
Sexual or gender identities may no longer be normatively valued and treated differently.
The recognition of the plurality of life forms must become the social guiding principle of a democratic community.
THE LEFT stands for the preservation and expansion of women's shelters and safe havens for people affected or threatened by violence.
The prevention of domestic violence is an important task of social institutions.
THE LEFT demands aid offers for women in social need, combined with the fight for minimum security and minimum income.
Moreover, there is a need for more aid offers for prostitutes.
THE LEFT demands special support for single parents.
Single parents are particularly affected by poverty due to the burden of care and the tax disadvantage compared to marriages.
Municipal politics must try to counteract this.
THE LEFT demands special support and the preservation of women's and girls' projects.
Social projects should always counteract the social differences between the sexes.
The Left wants to ban sexist or stereotype-promoting advertising on municipal areas.
The images we see every day influence us, and the public space that we all have to use should not offer any space for discrimination.
The Left demands the possibility of childcare at all sessions of the city and district councils as well as the committees.
Because even in Dortmund municipal politics cannot be equal.
So far, none of the district mayors is a woman, the proportion of women in the district councils is 32 percent, and in the council it is not much better.
Dortmund politics should counteract the underrepresentation of women.
Because women still mainly take on the task of childcare, this can enable them to participate.
Women should also be systematically promoted in the municipal administration.
The Left makes it clear: the boundaries do not run between the sexes, but rather between upstairs and downstairs.
The Left fights for the joint struggle of all genders for equality, justice and against sexism.
Men are called upon to stand in solidarity with their female colleagues.
The Left is committed to the introduction of a minimum 50 percent female quota for leadership positions in the administration and in the municipal companies.
10.
Antifascism No to fascism, racism, right-wing populism The Left wants open, diverse and multifaceted municipalities.
This includes the coexistence of people in different life situations and with different lifestyles.
A livable municipality requires respect – respect for different life concepts and different opinions.
Fascist and right-wing populist organizations want the opposite and set out to spread hate against minorities and migrants.
Fascist and right-wing populist organizations attempt to make minorities and migrants the scapegoats for poverty and social divisions.
Poverty and precarious living conditions are widespread in Dortmund.
This must be combated in the interests of social justice.
This also takes away the ground from fascist and racist arguments.
The right-wing scene has changed in North Rhine-Westphalia in recent years.
The NPD and the Pro-NRW movement were still represented on the right-wing spectrum in the 2014 local elections.
At the same time, however, the newly founded party “The Right” appeared in individual cities, and the AfD was represented for the first time.
The right-wing extremists were able to win individual municipal mandates, and the AfD entered many municipal parliaments, in some cases as a group.
In recent years, a social polarization has taken place.
While racist statements are heard more frequently in public and many people are turning to right-wing populist, nationalist and right-wing parties, on the other hand, more and more people are taking to the streets against the right and for social improvements.
The right-wing scene is a daily threat to many people in the municipalities.
Neo-fascists and right-wing populists are still present in municipal representations, including in Dortmund.
It is an unbearable burden that they spread their anti-human ideology through these mandates.
Neo-fascism has a long tradition in Dortmund: in the After their organization was banned by the state interior minister, they are simply continuing under the guise of party privilege under the name “The Right”.
The Left welcomes the ban on the right-wing extremist fraternities.
These are trying to conquer public space, supported by defensive case law and by the lack of criminal prosecution.
They regularly march in Dortmund and spread their fascist, anti-Semitic and dehumanizing propaganda, inciting against our neighbors, colleagues from Eastern Europe, migrants and refugees.
Young people in particular are part of the declared target group of the neo-Nazis.
The Left demands: Courts, police and administration must use all legal means to prevent neo-fascist activities, and in doing so, they must rely on innovation and creativity.
The Left clearly rejects the extremism theory, which places antifascists and the Left on an equal footing with Nazis and racists and thus criminalizes antifascist engagement.
The Left welcomes the establishment of a special commission against the right by the Dortmund police.
The Left expects that the resulting control pressure on the Nazi scene will be maintained or even expanded On the contrary: they try to prevent the common resistance of people of different origins against social cutbacks and the destruction of jobs by dividing them along racial lines.
The attack by Nazis on election night 2014 on the town hall shows that they rely on violence.
The party “Die Rechte” (The Right) represents a clear National Socialist course in its programme.
THE LEFT argues that we must combine the resistance against racism and neo-Nazis with demands for social improvements, because only in this way can we deprive the fascists of their breeding ground.
We cannot rely on the state in the fight against Nazis (the NSU scandal and the repeated use of police violence against anti-fascists show this).
We support the concept of disrupting and, if possible, preventing the marches of Nazis with counter-demonstrations and peaceful, determined blockades – side by side with young people, workers, the unemployed, pensioners, LGBTIQ activists of different origins.
Since 2001, five people have been murdered by Nazis in Dortmund.
There is probably a connection between the Dortmund In addition to the Bittermark, the Rombergpark and the foreigners' cemetery, the Steinwache is the central location for keeping the memory of the horrors alive, which are associated with the national socialist ideology.
The municipal election program 2020 of DIE LINKE wants to preserve the already laid stumbling stones and keep the memory of the victims of the Nazis alive in a very concrete way in the streets.
Further stumbling stones should also keep the memory alive and bring the victims out of anonymity.
Stumbling stones are also to be protected from right-wing extremist marches.
DIE LINKE demands the renaming of streets and squares that still bear the names of accomplices of German fascism or of racists, antisemites and militarists.
DIE LINKE has long demanded the banning of the terror group Combat 18 in Germany.
Canada had already put the German section "Combat 18" of the American "Blood and Honour" terrorists on the anti-terror list last year.
DIE LINKE expressly welcomes the ban of the group in Germany.
DIE LINKE does not overlook DIE LINKE makes a clear distinction between the voters and the members of the party.
DIE LINKE takes note with incomprehension that the federal government has drastically cut the funds for the exit programmes from the right-wing extremism.
DIE LINKE demands that the “Exit” programme in the greater Dortmund area be continued.
The financing is to be secured through public funds of both the state and the communes.
We fight against racist and neo-fascist hate on all levels together with the citizens: on demonstrations, in anti-fascist social alliances, in youth and cultural alliances.
DIE LINKE is committed to dialogue with migrants in order to reduce mutual fears and prejudices and to enable a solidary and peaceful coexistence.
DIE LINKE is equally committed to opposing the fascists from the migrant spectrum.
The municipal administration should also be guided by these guidelines.
The departments of order, youth or health and the entire municipal administration have a political responsibility and should work to create a liveable commune for all people beyond their origin or their way of life.
DIE LINKE is committed to ensuring THE LEFT wants to promote intercultural meeting places, youth facilities and sports clubs.
THE LEFT wants the action plan against right-wing extremism, which was passed by the council with a broad majority, to be implemented.
There must be no budget cuts in the fight against anti-democrats.
THE LEFT demands that the “Coordination Centre for Diversity, Tolerance and Democracy – against Right-wing Extremism, Xenophobia and Antisemitism” in Dortmund should be adequately financed.
Appropriate information about right-wing extremist groups and labels can also help to ensure that premises are not made available and rental contracts are not concluded out of ignorance.
THE LEFT considers the victim support centre “Backup” to be indispensable.
In view of the ever-increasing range of tasks in the counselling of victims of right-wing violence or threats, the counselling centre should be equipped with additional staff.
Never again fascism!
11.
Immigration, human rights and solidarity For a life without discrimination THE LEFT says: Germany is an immigration country.
In Dortmund people from Migrants are particularly affected by social cuts and benefits cuts: in the job market and income, in civil rights and educational opportunities, in cultural life and in the residential area.
These problems become visible locally, on the municipal level, and are concentrated here.
In Dortmund, almost 35 percent of the population has a migration background, and among children under six years of age, there are even many more.
In addition to the “classic” migrants, since the EU’s eastward expansion, there have been newcomers and refugees from war and crisis regions.
For the most part, they have found their current home in the impoverished city districts of Dortmund, where there is currently an above-average competition, for example, for living space and childcare places.
People with a migration background – newcomers even more so than those who have been living here for a long time – often have more difficult conditions to achieve the same scholastic and professional successes as their fellow citizens without a migration background.
Dortmund is making commendable efforts to mitigate the effects of unequal starting conditions.
However, the factual segregation of migrant and non-migrant city districts has DIE LINKE strongly supports an additional funding offer for children with a migration background in day care centers and schools and the establishment of support and counseling services for parents with a migration background.
DIE LINKE is committed to expanding the number of day care center places, especially in the under-served, migration-prone neighborhoods, especially in the north.
DIE LINKE supports all measures with regard to intercultural competence in schools and kindergartens; it advocates for early language support with the involvement of parents.
DIE LINKE advocates for the right to vote for all those who have their center of life in Germany.
It demands that the right to vote in local elections be extended to all non-EU citizens.
DIE LINKE wants the Integration Council to be heard by politics and administration in all matters relating to integration.
DIE LINKE advocates for cooperation with universities, schools, chambers of commerce and industry and local businesses to develop concepts for the recognition of school, university and vocational qualifications.
DIE LINKE demands that people with a migration background be taken into account in new hires in the administration in accordance with the composition of DIE LINKE stands for ensuring humane living conditions for asylum seekers and those awaiting permission to stay.
It demands a more generous and less restrictive approach to discretionary powers in matters of residence law.
DIE LINKE demands better access to healthcare for asylum seekers and those awaiting permission to stay.
DIE LINKE is calling for the establishment of municipal hardship committees that refugees and migrants threatened with deportation can turn to.
12.
Peace For a respectful and peaceful coexistence DIE LINKE is calling for a respectful and peaceful coexistence of all those living in our city.
A peaceful urban life is an indispensable basis for the belief that peace in international relations is also worth striving for and is achievable.
DIE LINKE is calling for: International relations should be established and maintained!
Twinning arrangements should be developed beyond protocol gestures into a lived exchange of population groups.
In particular, school exchanges should be expanded.
Let us make use of the fact that both Dortmund and Riga, Tallinn, Pskov, Velikiy Novgorod or Kiev belong to All these municipalities need peace for their existence and further development.
THE LEFT says: No advertising for death!
A municipal policy committed to peace rejects the support of war preparations and warmongering: advertising for the Bundeswehr may not be supported by the city.
In particular, advertising boards in the vicinity of schools should not advertise the Bundeswehr as an employer and career opportunity.
The design of concession contracts must be taken into account.
Young people must be informed that they can object to the transfer of their personal data and thus protect themselves against advertising by the Bundeswehr.
Municipal Election Programme 2020 Advertising appearances of the Bundeswehr at job fairs, insofar as these are under municipal (co-)responsibility, and at local festivals or city events may not be allowed.
THE LEFT is committed to: a peaceful world!
The city council has agreed to the ICAN City Appeal and has thus made a commendable commitment to a world free of nuclear weapons.
This declaration of intent can be given additional emphasis by disseminating the decision and appropriate peace-oriented public relations work.
Opportunities for this include the Easter march, the day of remembrance for the atomic bomb on Hiroshima, and the days of remembrance in connection with the criminal world wars.
DIE LINKE demands: civil-military cooperation only for civil purposes!
The commune ensures that the planning of civil-military cooperation is exclusively for defensive purposes, such as natural disasters.
DIE LINKE says: Dortmund's city area is taboo for military use!
The NATO has been displaying its warlike abilities in a disturbing manner on its eastern border for years.
The necessary troop movements are also conducted over North Rhine-Westphalian territory.
In the case of the use of roads or railways that lead over Dortmund territory, the city does not display any voluntary or supportive cooperation that goes beyond its duties.
13.
Culture, Sport and Leisure Culture and sport for everyone!
Everyone needs culture.
Culture serves to help people understand each other on a fundamental level.
Culture can be practiced alone or in company, actively or from the position of the audience.
Dortmund is a city with a clear separation between the poor and the well-off.
This is also reflected in cultural participation.
There is a high culture, which is only accessible to a part of the population in terms of its educational and financial requirements.
This is something that needs to be addressed, and the possibilities for this are to be found, in particular, in educational justice and in labor market policy measures.
An expansion of the Dortmund Pass for broader cultural access is necessary.
Culture in the high-price segment The Dortmund cultural landscape is characterized by a well-attended and high-quality high culture.
The Left supports the necessary investments to maintain the status.
The Left also supports the establishment of an “Academy for Theater and Digitality” in the Nordstadt.
The Left rejects a ruinous cultural competition between the Ruhr cities or a competition with Poland.
Free cultural scene There is a free cultural scene, whose actors, however, often feel a precarious existence.
Even in times of shrinking budgets, DIE LINKE is fighting for their support.
Support can also be provided by the provision of suitable resources – for example, for the free use of suitable municipal spaces for all areas of culture, including music.
This also includes public space: street music is part of a lively big city, and DIE LINKE rejects senseless attempts to regulate it.
The aim should rather be to define areas in which street musicians are also allowed to perform with amplifiers.
Wherever possible, the neighbourhood culture should be strengthened, as it is part of a desirable neighbourhood coexistence and, in particular, in the poorer city districts, it enables cultural participation to a certain extent for the people living there.
DIE LINKE also considers it worth supporting the visible presentation of collections and the exchange of collections with other museums.
DIE LINKE is particularly committed to the preservation and further development of industrial culture facilities such as the Hoesch Museum.
Libraries DIE LINKE is against the possibility of Sunday opening of libraries, because it sees this as an attack on the working conditions of those employed there.
Sports and leisure opportunities Sports and leisure opportunities are necessary for relax Participation in sports and leisure facilities not only maintains and promotes health, but also creates a sense of community with others.
Sport also has integrative functions.
Sports clubs make an important contribution to the integration of migrants into society.
The 2020 municipal election program of DIE LINKE fights against the privatization of municipal sports facilities, especially sports halls and swimming pools.
These must be available to schools and clubs free of charge to a sufficient extent.
Privatized swimming pools must be transferred back into the management of sports and leisure companies.
DIE LINKE demands a municipal program for the barrier-free conversion of all sports facilities.
DIE LINKE is in favor of free admission to sports and leisure facilities for children from low-income families and for unbureaucratically approved free club memberships.
The Dortmund Pass must include all outdoor pools.
The main focus of the DIE LINKE party is on amateur sports, especially children's and youth sports.
The city is responsible for maintaining and improving the infrastructure in this area.
High-performance sports, especially for athletes with disabilities, with its national and Appropriate sports facilities for high-performance athletes as well as talent promotion are worth supporting for the LEFT.
14.
Democracy and Transparency More information and decision-making opportunities for residents The word commune comes from the Latin “communis”, which means “communal”.
Originally, the citizens were meant to decide on the future of society together.
For years, however, we have been experiencing a policy that is often directed against the interests and needs of low-income people in this city.
THE LEFT fights for the right of all residents to live self-determined and to participate both economically and politically.
This means more opportunities for participation in the commune and full transparency in political decision-making processes.
THE LEFT demands that the residents on site be integrated into the political discourse so that they can decide on their own future.
For this, the people need complete information and better direct decision-making opportunities such as citizens’ initiatives and citizens’ votes.
THE LEFT is also committed to reducing bureaucratic hurdles.
The Left will demand that the Dortmund City Council make decisions on key issues for the future.
The Left rejects administrative reform that leads to the privatisation of public tasks or the transfer of burdens to the municipalities or that ultimately aims to reduce staff.
The Left therefore says quite clearly: We are fighting for improvements for the residents of the city.
However, these improvements must not be at the expense of the employees in the administration, whose health is put at risk by overloading or underloading.
A useful tool here is the stress analysis, which is required by the Occupational Safety Act.
Here, the burden is objectively determined and the works council has a say.
The Left demands: All 12 districts of Dortmund must be preserved.
Local politics and proximity to the citizens are indispensable.
The Left will continue to take up concrete proposals from the residents and try to win majorities for them.
The Left says clearly: We work with citizen initiatives and other non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in Dortmund and try to give them a parliamentary voice.
THE LEFT demands more rights for the municipalities vis-à-vis the federal government and the states.
THE LEFT is in favour of improving the information provided to citizens and measures that increase the transparency of political decisions.
An example would be live streaming of council meetings.
THE LEFT is in favour of eliminating shadow budgets, such as the special assets.
THE LEFT demands a systematic further development of the current participation procedures for the municipal budget to create a genuine citizen budget.
THE LEFT says: In all participation procedures, it must be ensured that affected minorities are given special consideration and not left out.
Municipal Election Programme 2020 15.
Digitisation Taking advantage of the opportunities of digitalisation – guaranteeing data sovereignty.
THE LEFT considers access to digital information to be a fundamental right of every human being.
It is part of the public provision of services to ensure that everyone has access to the internet.
At the same time, citizens must be protected from further collection of their data by companies.
Everyone must be able to decide for themselves which data they want to make available.
THE LEFT demands the expansion of public WLAN as Freifunk.
A high-performance and future-proof network infrastructure must be available everywhere.
THE LEFT demands that digitalisation and technical progress benefit the entire society.
The more efficient design of work processes and increasing productivity must be used to reduce working hours with full pay and personal compensation.
Smart City is supposedly a project to strengthen Dortmund as a digital economic location.
However, what is happening is the sale of public space and the data of Dortmund residents.
Smart City was initiated by the Industry and Commerce Chamber Dortmund.
The project serves to create new investment and earning opportunities for companies, many of which are not based in Dortmund.
Due to the great influence of companies, which provide all the expert teams, no decisions can be made in the interests of the Dortmund citizens.
THE LEFT rejects the neoliberal concept of Smart City.
We do not want corporations to have access to the data of our city and its citizens.
Data is the commodity of the digital age, and everyone must be able to use the public space without giving it to a private company.
THE LEFT does not want an expansion of the video surveillance of public spaces.
Video material about public places should not be in the hands of the private sector.
The automated evaluation of the material without a specific reason must not take place.
Video surveillance does not prevent crimes, but rather shifts them.
Digitalization of the administration In the digitalization of administrative processes, Dortmund still has a lot of catching up to do.
It should simplify work and organize processes in a more cost-effective way.
The concerns of the employees must be taken into account.
THE LEFT demands the consistent adherence to the agreement between the staff council and the management.
THE LEFT expects comprehensive data protection for the citizens.
Data security is a top priority.
We reject the release of citizens' data to private companies.
The Left wants to strengthen e-government: Bureaucratic procedures can be simplified or even eliminated with the help of digitalization.
At the same time, care must be taken to ensure that people without access to digital technology are not excluded from the services of the commune.
The Left demands that the city administration switch to open-source programs.
Open source means that everyone can see, change and adapt the source code of the computer program to their needs.
Only those who know the source code can say what a program really does.
This is the only way the city can guarantee the data security of its residents.
It saves license fees and makes the city independent of manufacturers.
The Left wants the use of open interfaces.
Only when the city uses open standards for communication with each other, with other municipalities and with its citizens, does it not make free advertising for companies and is independent of manufacturers.
THE LEFT wants to make the city's geodata publicly accessible.
Time-consuming applications will thus become unnecessary.
Building projects and plans can be accelerated.
Strengthening digital competencies To increase the digital competencies of the citizens of Dortmund, more educational opportunities are needed.
Investments in the equipment of schools must be increased, both in technology and in the employment of computer science teachers.
The support of the state of NRW must be demanded.
THE LEFT demands: Open-source software should also be used in schools.
By teaching with, for example, Microsoft or Apple products, the students become tied to these companies and cannot acquire real digital competencies.
Students must be informed about the data grabbing of large corporations.
Municipal Election Program 2020 THE LEFT wants continuous training of the municipal employees to keep them up-to-date with the latest technology.
16.
Social issues even after the election: THE LEFT has kept its promises The election period in the Dortmund Council and the district councils has lasted six years due to the repeated merging of the elections for mayor and council.
The Council, its committees and the district councils have made several thousand decisions during this time to shape Dortmund.
At this point, we would like to highlight the most important successes of our faction as an example.
In order to develop more power, THE LEFT has entered into an alliance with the PIRATES on the committee level.
This had political risks - in practice, however, this cooperation has lasted throughout the entire election period.
The joint faction DIE LINKE & PIRATES included eight of the 94 council members.
Despite this minority position, the faction has always managed to organize democratic majorities for its ideas and proposals and thus change Dortmund in some areas for the better - or to ward off further deterioration.
First success - THE LEFT says: Hartz IV must go.
THE LEFT is still the only party in the Dortmund Council that rejects the Hartz IV system with its repr One thorn in our side were the forced relocations of Hartz IV recipients as well as the forced shut-offs of electricity, gas and water to people with low incomes.
In both cases, we were able to make great progress.
Thanks to our initiative, social housing is always considered appropriate for people receiving benefits – people are no longer being evicted from social housing.
In cooperation with the administration, we also developed a new system for calculating the limits of affordability for housing for Hartz IV recipients.
This is no longer based on the rental index, but on the actual housing offers, which have much higher rents than the rental index.
This means that the limits of affordability have been increased dramatically.
In addition, these housing offers are reviewed every year at our request and the limits of affordability are automatically adjusted upwards according to the development of rents.
The number of forced relocations due to housing that is not considered affordable has therefore decreased significantly.
People are allowed to stay in their homes.
Second success – fight against housing shortages The housing market observation of the city of Dortmund is proactive.
Therefore, we were able to recognize early on that Dortmund is heading towards a Our proposal to create a comprehensive housing development program was initially rejected by all other parties.
However, we were able to get some partial measures through.
For example, 25 percent of the apartments in every new development plan in the city will be designated as social housing.
And in 2019, our demand for the construction of municipal housing was finally taken up.
Late, but still.
Third success – better youth welfare Our strategy for restructuring economic youth welfare has now been implemented throughout the city.
After the chaos that the former Green children and youth commissioner left behind, it was important to take new paths here.
Our model in the youth office has led to more social workers being hired and to an increase in the level of care for families.
This has meant that fewer children have had to be placed in institutions, and at the same time, money has even been saved by terminating overpriced contracts with private youth welfare providers.
The employee surveys have been very positive.
Fourth success – more training places After years of cuts in the workforce, we have managed to initiate a trend in the city's personnel policy by increasing the number of training places.
The city administration is over-aged overall.
In order to permanently maintain all services for the people, we need fresh blood.
Therefore, at our request, after several rounds of negotiations, the training places for the administrative service were doubled and the trainees were also taken into the service of the city.
Our continuous follow-up has also led to the fact that a department for occupational safety has now been set up in the personnel department.
Municipal election program 2020 Fifth success – lawsuit against the airport As promised in the election campaign in 2014, we have done our best to protect the people in the flight paths of Dortmund Airport.
The attempt by the airport to establish take-offs and landings up to the night flight area has failed.
Our group had made a lawyer specializing in aviation law available to an affected plaintiff.
Even an expert opinion commissioned by our group on the need for the airport ultimately led to the fact that an already approved extension of the operating hours THE LEFT has always been a guarantor that, despite the extensive restructuring at the municipal utilities in the course of this process (introduction of a municipal utilities holding company), the co-determination rights of the approximately 2,000 employees at DSW21 were preserved.
A Europe-wide tender could be avoided and a direct award to DSW21 could be made.
Privatisation of particularly lucrative bus and train lines could be prevented.
This means that the quality of local transport can be maintained and further expanded.
A new modern transport station is also to be built at Dortmund Town Hall following a successful application by THE LEFT, which will connect the various modes of transport (underground, S-Bahn, bicycles, pedestrians, electric vehicles, etc.).
The operating times of the H-Bahn at Dortmund University could also be extended to include Saturdays thanks to our involvement, much to the delight of students.
Seventh success – interest and compound interest Private-Public Partnerships (PPP) are now so generally regarded as uneconomical by the Federal Court of Auditors that it has become common knowledge in the Dortmund Council that such Eighth success – municipal peace policy No deportations to Afghanistan: In Afghanistan there has been war for decades with no end in sight.
We consider it irresponsible to deport people to countries in civil war and have therefore enforced a moratorium on deportations for people from Afghanistan.
No one in Dortmund will be deported to war and thus possibly directly to their death.
Dortmund has joined the Cities Alliance against Nuclear Weapons: At the request of the LEFT, Dortmund has joined the ICAN Cities Alliance.
This international municipal association wants to exert pressure from below on the respective governments to renounce nuclear weapons.
Germany is called upon to give up the nuclear bombs stored at the Luftwaffenstützpunkt Büchel of the Bundeswehr as part of nuclear participation.
Ninth success – climate policy As a perennial issue, a multitude of measures were put in motion with our votes.
Here we will only mention a few as examples.
In a basic resolution, a red-red-green majority has spoken out in favor of a transportation revolution and the “emissions-free city center” with a reconstruction of the Wallring.
The Dortmund district heating network will be And the demands of Fridays for Future for the declaration of a climate emergency were brought into the council by DIE LINKE and passed – small bitter pill: the term “climate emergency” was rejected by the council majority.
Through our initiative, the effects on the climate and nature conservation as well as the social effects are now listed separately in the administration’s drafts.
Partial success – re-municipalisation of DEW at the end of 2014: after years of preparation, the partnership agreement of the Dortmund energy and water supplier DEW21 was extended.
DIE LINKE has always advocated for the takeover of the shares held by RWE in DEW21.
However, the majority of the council wanted to maintain the status quo for RWE.
At the end of the process, it was still possible to buy back seven percent of the shares.
As we now know, this was a very lucrative business, as not only was the share acquisition financed by the dividends of DEW21, but the municipal utilities also earned money that was used for public transport.
A model of success that proves us right and that we will continue to use Municipal Election Programme 2020 Single parents 18, 21, 42, 50 Age 5, 12ff.
Age discrimination 13 Old-age pension 13 Adequacy limits 21, 63f.
Job opportunities 12 Unemployment 10ff., 37, 40, 43 Jobs 11, 29, 36, 39ff.
Occupational safety 46, 60, 64 Poverty 5, 10ff., 37, 39, 43, 50f., 54f.
Species protection 24, 66 Biodiversity 26, 28 Nuclear energy 31 Car traffic 32f., 36 Barrier-free 14ff.
Disability transport service 16 Disability representation 16 Disability 14, 16f., 59 Vocational training 38 Employment policy 37 Affordable housing 18 Education 39, 4 Comprehensive school 44 Health care 46, 49, 56 Health system 5, 9, 18, 20, 42, 45ff., 49, Trade tax 7f.
Equality 49f.
Groppenbruch 27 Basic security 5 Hartz IV 5, 40, 63 Industrial wasteland 24 Inclusion 14ff., 44 Integration 43, 55, 58 International Garden Exhibition 24, 27 Kita 9, 41f., 44, 55 Climate 22, 34, 36, 66 Climate debate 26 Climate goals 22 Clinic 46 Municipal tax law 9, 20 Municipal enterprises 9 Connectivity requirement 7 Concert hall 7 Cost of accommodation 21 L663n (OWIIIa) 28, 35 Landscape plan 22 Protected landscape area 24, 26, 29 Long-term Care 13f., 46ff.
Care dependency 13 Care insurance 13 Privatisation 8, 24, 40, 43, 46, 59f.
Cyclists 33, 36 Cycling 25, 32 Racism 50, 52 Right-wing scene 51 Right-wing extremism 53f.
Renewable energy sources 30 Re-municipalisation 8, 30, 47, 66RWE 10, 30f., 66 School 7, 15f., 41, 43ff., 52, 55f., 59, 62 School system 17, 43f.
Swimming pools 13, 43, 59 Seniors 11, 13, 33 Smart City 61 Social disadvantage 10 Social facilities 11 Social housing 21, 24 Social assistance 12 Social welfare 12 Socialism 6 Social benefits Living 5, 9, 17f., 24 Housing construction 19ff., 24 Homelessness 11 Housing market 15, 18ff., 64 Forced shutdowns 30, 63 Forced relocations 21, 63f.