Mensch Umwelt Tierschutz - Animal Welfare Party in Dortmund.
Successes of the past legislative period.
With heart and mind for Dortmund - Balance sheet and outlook.
Election program of the (Animal Welfare Party) Municipal Election on September 14, 2025 in Dortmund in Dortmund for the city council.
The party's consistent work has been reflected in over 50 motions and inquiries, which made central progress in the areas of animal welfare, environmental policy and social justice.
The Animal Protection Party is once again taking part in the municipal elections in Dortmund.
In recent years, we have been able to establish ourselves as a firm political force in the city.
We represent well-founded positions not only in classic animal protection, but also in climate and environmental protection, social justice, mobility, education, citizen participation and human rights.
We stand for progressive thinking and action and for politics for our children.
Our election program is divided into three areas: people, environment and animals.
The order does not represent a weighting, but shows that all three areas are deeply intertwined for us and are treated with equal priority.
Numerous chapters have been developed jointly with the Klimaliste NRW.
We would like to thank you very much for the wonderful and productive cooperation!
16 Free public toilets .....................................................................................
17 Effective sound insulation ................................................................................................
17 For Europe, against all extremism ..........................................................................
17 Social and ecological awareness.........................................................................
18 Give-away places and bulky waste days for more sustainability.
19 Advertising ban in front of school buildings........................................................................................
19 Child and youth welfare................................................................................................
.20 Strengthening voluntary work..........................................................................................................
20 For an ecological, local economy............................................................
21 Local currency “Dortmunder Kohle”...........................................................................22 Start-up location for sustainability................................................................
..............
22 Safety, but without instrumentalisation......................................................
23 Safe routes to school......................................................................................................
23 Preventing reckless driving and cruising........................................................................
26 Strengthening a healthy school environment.
26 Municipal education policy.
27 Municipal cooperation with the local school landscape.
27 School gardens.
28 Digital administration on an equal footing.
28 Environment.
29 Protection of the urban forest in the climate crisis.
29 Integrated bird protection in cooperation with farmers.
30 Climate neutrality by 2035.
31 Offering and expanding free public transport and H-Bahn.
32 Transport revolution: open to innovation.
36 Nutrition in public institutions.
37 Organic farming.
37 Emission value information / labelling obligation in the catering industry.
37 Food waste.
38 More greenery and less sealing.
38 Threatened plant species.
40 Glyphosate and nitrate pollution.
40 Light pollution.
41 Waste pollution.
42 Urban Mining.
42 Animal welfare.
44 Combating animal cruelty.
44 Strengthening the Dortmund Animal Welfare Centre.
45 Supporting animal welfare associations and initiatives.
The party sees humans as part of nature.
We take the biodiversity and climate crisis seriously and refuse to react to it with technocratic optimism.
Only a holistic change in society will make a harmonious coexistence of humans with each other and with nature possible.
We denounce the persistence of a throwaway society and demand and promote more respect for the goods produced, for the environment, for animals and for people.
We demand a society that is self-critical about itself and its past, that is aware of its responsibility to the younger generation.
We reject the capitalist worldview of humans as interchangeable goods.
That is why we clearly and unequivocally stand up for social, ecological and intergenerational justice.
We demand model projects that are based on scientific facts.
We want to create new concepts for regulated and scientifically monitored studies for the distribution of drugs to adults.
We also demand a massive expansion of support services and strengthening of the local organisations and associations.
We demand regular and mandatory addiction counselling and education by specialists with age-appropriate content in all schools.
We also demand the so-called drug checking.
This is an offer in which drugs are tested for quality, purity and adulterants in a mobile laboratory before party events.
The apartment is the basis for stabilization, social participation and health.
This approach has proven successful internationally, for example in Finland and Berlin, and must finally be effectively implemented in Dortmund.
We demand a new municipal way of thinking in dealing with people who live on the street.
Housing is a human right!
We are fighting for a city in which no one has to live on the street!
Defensive architecture: We want to work towards the city of Dortmund abandoning measures that can be classified as so-called “defensive architecture” (also known as homeless architecture) We stand against any form of discrimination and hatred.
No one is discriminated against because of their gender identity or sexuality.
We will make them visible.
In many countries, even homosexuality is still punishable.
We want to enable LGBTQIA+ persons to find asylum in Germany or Dortmund from political persecution and discrimination.
We demand that Dortmund in the German City Council fights for an international procedure that offers these people the opportunity to put down roots here.
We defend the right to asylum enshrined in the constitution (Article 16 of the Basic Law).
As a democratic society, we see it as our responsibility to provide protection to people who are fleeing life-threatening situations.
Campaigners want criminal prosecution of the clients, not the prostitutes.
Offering counselling/therapy to convicted clients.
Education about the so-called "loverboy method" in schools.
Financial aid for those affected who want to leave prostitution.
Campaigns against the romanticisation of prostitution in music and media.
Worldwide, 60% of those affected by human trafficking are girls and women.
In Germany, it is even 95.2% ofThose affected.
Prostitution reduces women in particular to objects of sexual availability.
Dortmund must take responsibility here and can no longer turn a blind eye.
The Nordic model offers a way out: it takes the demand out of the equation, decriminalises those affected and creates real opportunities for exit.
Three-quarters of all care cases are cared for by relatives, without whom our over-stretched care system would collapse.
We want a Dortmund free of all discrimination and see the city itself as responsible for working towards this.
In Dortmund, no one should be discriminated against on the basis of nationality, gender, gender identity, sexuality, faith, skin colour or appearance.
We are committed to a social housing policy that prevents displacement and secures access to safe, affordable housing.
For a livable city we also demand: Preservation and renovation of public swimming pools, playgrounds and leisure facilities.
More dog meadows in all city districts.
Leash obligation in nature reserves, in park-like areas and on children's playgrounds.
Temporary modular homes on vacant land – as a pragmatic solution for students, trainees and refugees.
We demand a comprehensive revision of the noise protection concept for the entire city area.
A new municipal concept for noise reduction and more retroactive sound protection.
Green waves for cars without impairing cyclists.
More green arrows for right turns.
Modern sound protection at the railway tracks.
Tightening of the sound protection guidelines.
We stand against all currents and all attempts to play down the time of National Socialism.
We reject any trivialization and clearly distance ourselves from anti-Semitism.
We stand for an open, tolerant and enlightened society.
We reject Islamophobia and any form of discrimination based on religion or origin.
A clear distinction between Islam as a religion and the political extremism of Islamism is essential.
We are committed to promoting contact between children and animals in day care centers, children's clinics and primary schools.
We also demand the integration of school gardens.
We advocate for regular garbage collection days, as many people in Dortmund are not able to bring their things to be disposed of to the recycling yards.
We demand a restriction on advertising in front of school buildings.
Urban planning and traffic policy measures must take into account the needs of children and young people.
To reduce noise and increase safety, we demand a 30 km/h speed limit throughout.
We are advocating for a tangible appreciation and stronger support of voluntary work in Dortmund.
We want a comprehensive concept that does not leave any group out and does not discriminate against anyone.
We stand for an ecological, locally anchored economy as part of a lively urban culture.
Profit-making must not be at the expense of nature and people.
In order to achieve profound changes, innovative economic policy instruments are needed.
We rely on the introduction of the common good economy in all municipal institutions and a municipal regional currency that ensures that the added value remains in the region.
We advocate for the preservation and targeted strengthening of owner-managed businesses, local shops and non-profit structures.
Large corporations and chains that dictate their prices through the exploitation of people, animals and the environment can no longer be given preferential treatment.
We propose the introduction of a municipal regional currency “Dortmunder Kohle’ based on the model of the city of Ghent in Belgium.
Such a currency can provide impetus for a fair and resilient city economy in a wide range of areas.
Injured or killed children belong to the sad chapter of our daily traffic.
6- to 14-year-olds are particularly often injured on weekdays in the time from 7 to 8 am.
In order to make school routes safer, the behavior of the children must also be taken into account.
We demand a change in thinking: safety means taking social causes seriously.
Dortmund has a serious problem with excessive speed and traffic-endangering driving.
Speeding violations must be recorded and punished without gaps.
We advocate for a city-wide, all-day speed limit of 30 km/h in the inner city area.
Racial Profiling by the Police exists, even if it is prohibited.
Many politicians overlook this issue and thus prevent an honest confrontation with institutional discrimination.
We are calling for the establishment of a low-threshold, police-independent complaints office where those affected by discriminatory police checks can report incidents.
We want a city in which prevention, health care and social justice are at the forefront.
The decriminalisation of consumers and the regulation of the drug market is an effective step to achieve exactly that.
A sustainable drug policy relieves the police and judiciary.
We want a municipal youth council in Dortmund that represents the needs and wishes of the new generation and represents them in the city council.
We want Dortmund to make a strong commitment in local education policy.
Education policy is not just a matter for the federal government, but also for the cities.
The cities can have an influence on the educational success of the next generation.
Good equipment for day care centers and kindergartens is just as essential as well-trained staff.
We want the concept of service learning to be introduced in Dortmund.
School gardens offer opportunity to arouse interest in flora and fauna.
Art and culture should not be a luxury.
Politics can set the framework for social developments.
The positive possibilities that music, art and culture mean for people are scientifically proven.
Digitalisation not just for the sake of digitalisation but with a real benefit for the citizens of our city.
Official communication in easy language by 2030.
Environmental protection is not simply dismissed with a CO2 premium, with action policies that do not change our reality.
Sustainability may no longer be a question of the money bag, no question of external features.
The aim is to preserve biodiversity, especially the native bird population, as well as to protect a diverse cultural landscape and the regional production of healthy food.
Civic engagement in the field of species protection is to be specifically promoted by municipal programs for the protection of meadow birds.
At the municipal level, Dortmund must show ambition to become a climate-neutral city by 2035.
We need more green spaces and many small forests in the city area to keep the heating within limits.
We reject the use of blue (from natural gas) or grey (from coal) hydrogen, as well as the greenwashing that tries to sell it as ‘climate-neutral’ We see this as an attempt to continue to operate fossil gas infrastructure under the guise of sustainability.
Dortmund residents have been calling for the re-municipalisation of the city’s energy supply.
We consider it a disgrace that 39.9 percent of DSW21 subsidiary DEW21 (Dortmunder Energie und Wasser 21) is still owned by EON.
The city of Dortmund must buy back these EON facilities and convert the municipal utilities into businesses that operate in the common good.
Public transport must be given absolute priority over private car-based road traffic.
Dortmund must implement the transportation revolution with more speed, more investments and social justice.
A strong, barrier-free and affordable public transport system is the key to sustainable and future-oriented mobility.
Dortmund has the potential to become a real cycling city, but plans such as the 2019 council resolution on the "cycling city of Dortmund" are slow and incomplete.
The Ruhr Cycle Superhighway has been in the planning stages for years, but implementation in Dortmund is barely progressing.
The animal welfare party rejects the planned construction of the Hoeschallee as part of the so-called Nordspange decisively.
Completion was supposed to take place as early as 2024, but there are further delays, which we criticize.
The city of Dortmund plans to finance the 62 million euro road solely from municipal funds.
This is not only economic madness, but also blocks much-needed investments in education, social housing, public transport and municipal infrastructure.
Dortmund is trying to reduce emissions in the city in cooperation with its citizens.
The city simply ignores the high emission values of the airport when calculating climate-damaging emissions.
Dortmund citizens have to endure the noise and exhaust fumes and unknowingly finance it with their public transport tickets.
We also want to systematically reduce the number of flights over Dortmund, dismantle the airport and, in the medium term, close it.
There is a climate, marine and biodiversity crisis.
Fossil fuels and animal husbandry are the driving forces behind the runaway.
The switch to a vegan diet has the greatest positive impact that a person can take on the planet.
The IPCC agrees that a switch to plant-based nutrition can significantly reduce greenhouse gas emissions from food.
We will work to ensure that the city of Dortmund becomes part of the Plant Based Treaty initiative.
The use of environmentally friendly energy can be tested in the meantime to mitigate damage.
We are calling for an end to the half-hearted labeling of allergens.
It is a great shame for our society that people with allergies are still exposed to great health risks today when they want to eat out.
In order to achieve the goal of a climate-neutral city, we believe it is necessary to also include local catering establishments in emission value statements.
We want Dortmund to become greener vertically as well.
A city like Dortmund must not only slow down climate change, but also adapt to its consequences.
Green roofs and facades act like natural air conditioning and air filters.
Intensive roof greening even provides space for gardens, leisure and relaxation.
We demand that Dortmund creates flowering strips on all green spaces and currently unused fallow land.
More and more front gardens are being transformed into low-maintenance stone deserts.
Stone gardens heat up extremely and intensify the heat in the city.
Sealed urban areas should be identified and quickly de-sealed and ecologically upgraded.
In the Netherlands, for example, there are actions like "Tegelwippen" (Fliesenkippen)
The use of glyphosate and other environmentally harmful substances is to be banned throughout the city on the basis of the council resolution.
Nitrate pollution is a sensitive issue, as it is mainly caused by intensive agriculture, especially excessive fertilization and manure production.
In the long term, this can lead to an increased nitrate concentration in groundwater, which in turn could impair the quality of drinking water.
The Federal Administrative Court recently ruled that North Rhine-Westphalia must improve its programs to reduce nitrate pollution in groundwater.
The negative influence of excessive night-time lighting on humans, animals and vegetation is well researched today.
With its implementation, a scientific study is to take place, which examines the impact of the measures on local insect populations.
Dortmund has taken an important first step by converting all 54,000 street lamps by 2027.
The city should intensify its cooperation with local associations and non-profit initiatives in order to raise awareness of cleanliness.
We are committed to the systematic extraction of raw materials from existing buildings, infrastructure and landfills.
Urban mining enables a regional circular economy and conserves natural resources.
The dog tax should be used for what it is collected for and should be abolished for dogs adopted from animal welfare.
For reasons of animal and environmental protection, we should refrain from using fireworks on New Year's Eve, and instead allow, for example, threatening shows.
We want Dortmund to be a city in which people and animals feel comfortable.
Pigeons are intelligent and social animals that are wrongly referred to as "rats of the sky" It is scientifically proven that pigeons do not pose a health risk.
We demand the abolition of feeding bans and instead advocate for the feeding of pigeons in a species-appropriate manner.
For population regulation, we advocate the construction of pigeon lofts or pigeon houses.
It is overlooked that pigeon racing has contributed significantly to the problem and continues to do so.
We demand an explicit ban on the release of animals for entertainment or decoration purposes at public or private events.
What is marketed as romantic or symbolic actually means stress, suffering and often death for the affected animals.
The focus of the work is to be on schools and day care centers to educate the population about prejudices against pigeons.
Pigeons and fancy pigeons: breeding and exhibitions should be stopped.
The so-called pigeon sport is associated with massive animal suffering and contradicts an ethical approach to sentient beings.
Dortmund should fundamentally prohibit the release of wedding doves, butterflies or other animals for decorative or symbolic purposes.
We strongly reject this form of animal use and it must be abolished in the long term.
Fancy pigeon breeding focuses on external characteristics and often leads to cruel breeding.
Exhibitions of this kind promote these breeding goals and should not be allowed to take place in Dortmund.
We demand that the city run information campaigns about the reality of pigeon racing.
We want the dog tax to be converted into a purpose-bound dog owner fee.
The leash requirement should be relaxed for old, sick and disabled dogs.
Instead of a single animal welfare representative, several positions should be created in the future.
The tasks range from the control of animal welfare-relevant processes to expert assessments.
We demand the introduction of a permanent, full-time position for an animal protection officer in Dortmund.
Only people with proven qualifications in animal protection are considered for this task.
No persons from hunting clubs or interest groups that are in conflict with animal protection principles.
The animal welfare officers should act as a link between citizens, the city administration and animal welfare organizations.
Invasive species can displace native species, disrupt sensitive ecosystems and cause economic damage.
But invasive species also have a right to life and their control should not be limited to cruel or lethal methods such as hunting and trapping.
We advocate for an ethical approach to all animals and call for innovative, non-violent approaches that reconcile the protection of biodiversity with animal welfare values.
The aim of a municipal wild animal ban is to prevent inhumane and cruel treatment and “training” of animals in circuses.
Many renowned circuses have now voluntarily given up keeping animals.
The “Jagd & Hund’ fair, which takes place annually in Dortmund, is one of the largest hunting fairs in Europe.
The killing of wild animals is glorified as a leisure activity.
Hunting trips are organized trips to countries where wealthy hunters can kill wild animals.
Protected animal species are often killed in a cruel way.
Hunting trips to Africa, Eastern Europe and North America are particularly popular.
In Dortmund there is a hidden Schliefenanlage belonging to the German Teckelklub, in which live foxes are kept and tortured for the training of hunting dogs.
A general ban on hunting in Dortmund, as this hunting art is associated with considerable animal suffering.
Transparency and regular inspections of all animal-keeping facilities by the city of Dortmund.
Legal improvements at the state level to make the keeping and use of live animals in slaughterhouses binding.
Social cohesion should be the