The city of Dortmund has shown in the past that it can change courageously and decisively.
The path from beer, coal and steel to a modern, diverse city is already clearly visible in many places.
Dortmund can adopt the SPD Dortmund program for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025.
SPD candidate Thomas Westphal: We must reduce the cost of everyday life.
We must build more, socially and affordably, but also modern and sustainably.
We are putting the focus on family and education.
A younger city needs more childcare facilities and schools and it needs opportunities and jobs.
Dortmunder Stadtentwicklungsgesellschaft (DSG) was founded in 2022.
The first housing construction projects have since started and many more projects will follow in the coming years.
We will continue to maintain the mandatory 30 percent quota for publicly subsidized housing in new construction projects.
We want to avoid the sale of municipal land to private housing investors in principle and link it to strict conditions.
SPD Dortmund program for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025.
Will only approve larger building areas if the city can acquire ownership of significant portions of the building area – and at reasonable prices.
Local provision of the most important facilities for daily life is an essential component of liveable neighbourhoods.
We will link every new building project to public local transport, with a connection to the cycle network and, of course, to the fibre-optic network.
Social Democrats want to meet the demand for places in daycare centers and child daycare in Dortmund.
We will make significantly more funds available for the expansion of places and, as a city, we will completely abolish the daycare fees.
It is clear to us Social Democrats that education must be free of charge from the beginning.
In addition, we are also relying on a free and healthy lunch for all children in day care centers, daycare and school.
The lack of reliability of the system is a daily challenge for working families.
Lack of skilled workers and inadequate funding by the state of North Rhine-Westphalia force providers to reduce staffing levels and cut training places.
SPD Dortmund’s program for the local elections on September 14, 2025Our schools must become ‘beacons’ by means of a large, billion-worth school construction program.
We are investing in the future and will use the Dortmund share of the new “infrastructure special fund” in a targeted manner for investments in the education sector.
Devices that are now outdated must be replaced in the coming years.
Full-day care is part of the educational chain for us and should be accessible free of charge to all children in Dortmund with legal entitlement.
SPD Dortmund aims to create a rhythmic full-day school throughout the city.
The best offers for children in the areas of sport, health, nutrition, music, art, theater, self-confidence and digitalization must be systematically networked on site.
Multifunctional classrooms make it possible to create central locations for offers, for example from clubs and associations, even after school and OGS.
School social work is an important and indispensable element at schools.
School social work helps to prevent conflicts, violence or bullying at an early stage.
We want to promote interdisciplinary thinking and strengthen the self-efficacy experiences of students.
Extracurricular learning locations and offers are a matter of course for us.
Dortmund can provide spaces for youth.
Just today, where school takes up more and more time, our children want to be creative and to be able to try things out.
There is a shortage of youth centers, meeting places and leisure activities.
For young people there is often no more space.
Playgrounds should be accessible to all children and designed to be barrier-free.
Tenants should be involved in the design of the playgrounds.
They should become places of common life.
The city of Dortmund is ensuring that the revised playing field regulations are enforced.
The aim is that all playing fields that fall within the scope of the regulations will meet the new requirements.
Social cohesion in cities is crucial for a peaceful and pleasant living together.
Social justice and equal opportunities also play a central role, so that all people can feel like they are part of the community.
We will create more decentralised offers and places for people to meet each other in the individual districts of the city.
We want to offer students the opportunity to actively deal with the history and present of our city – across generations, inclusively and creatively.
Volunteer work in clubs is an important pillar of social life in the neighbourhoods.
It creates community, promotes cohesion and enriches cultural and sporting offerings locally.
Health is a crucial factor for a fulfilled and equal, participatory life.
We want to create low-threshold offers for the health of the people living here.
The number of people in need of care continues to rise, the need for support is becoming more extensive and more diverse.
We will continue to insist that the state of North Rhine-Westphalia finally fulfil its investment obligations adequately.
SPD Dortmund will fight homelessness through a combination of social support, preventive and intelligent individual political measures.
Anti-fascism has always been a cornerstone of social democratic thinking and action.
We will not agree to any of their motions, as the AfD pursues a contemptible and right-wing extremist worldview that we do not want to legitimize.
If this happens, we will exclude any form of cooperation with representatives of this party.
Parties that despise our constitution and the constitutionally guaranteed equality of all people do not stand on democratic ground.
We stand by our humanitarian responsibility and will continue to accept people who have to flee their home.
Queer people need places to develop.
Education and information are essential for a diverse Dortmund.
A gender-equal city has not yet been achieved.
Women are still structurally disadvantaged in many areas of life.
The sexual exploitation of minors for the financial enrichment of third parties is not “child prostitution”, but a serious crime.
We want to counteract this, also by informing children, young people and their parents about their rights and about criminal law.
We will continue to support the Mitternachtsmission e.V.
financially and will develop strategies to combat this exploitation and violence together with all relevant actors.
Dortmund is a growing city with more than 615,000 inhabitants.
The city's economy is diversified, i.e.
broadly based.
The image of the "economic centipede" is adhered to.
A maximum diversification of the Dortmund economic landscape is our clear goal.
We are committed to the Dortmund steel site.
Domestic production and further processing of climate-friendly steel is strategically necessary.
Dortmund needs economic areas for modern, future-proof businesses in the real economy.
The city's task is to provide a quantitatively, qualitatively and locally balanced range of standard commercial areas.
The re-designation of an industrial area in the open space will only take place if the land acquisition, further development and densification of existing industrial areas can no longer be proven.
The strategic acquisition and targeted development of land in Dortmund and outside the city will support and promote the economic development of the city.
The planning reserve held by the city for the next 15 years will be limited to 100 hectares of potential land.
We will continue and develop the municipal employment strategy.
We will modernize and renovate the vocational colleges with the funds from the “Infrastructure Special Fund” We will make the public sector in Dortmund a strategic buyer for digital technologies and applied AI solutions.
City centers should be places of encounter, experience and identification – not just shopping locations.
Here we are also creating play areas for children, so that families are happy to come to the city and the city stay is also an option.
SPD Dortmund will hold municipal elections on 14 September 2025.
The party wants to better connect the various modes of transport and to give all residents the opportunity to sustainably abandon their individual modes.
The transport system must become more reliable, even on holidays and at off-peak times.
We want a local transport system that is friendly to working people and that is close to their lives.
We will push forward the connection of the H-Bahn network from the university to the U42 “Theodor-Fliedner-Heim” stop.
SPD Dortmund program for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025.
All bus stops in Dortmund to be accessible to people with disabilities and parents with strollers.
Road offensive with a budget of 25 million euros for the years 2024 and 2025, which will drive forward the renovation of roads – without any financial burden on residents.
We demand that social ticket offers may never be more expensive than the monthly basic allowance for making cycling easy.
The aim is to continue to expand the cycle network, to create safe and clearly marked cycle lanes.
We want to keep passing cars out of residential areas and the immediate city center through clever traffic control systems.
We will continue this necessary renovation program after 2025 and increase the budget.
Unsafe intersections, missing safety strips or poor lighting affect the safety perception of road users, and we want to remedy this as part of the road offensive.
To make the choice of means of transportation more free, we will expand the car and bike sharing offer throughout the city.
We consider streets in the city center and residential areas that are blocked by parked cars to be unattractive.
SPD candidate: We will ensure better lighting of popular paths, streets, parks and underpasses.
We especially recognize the work of the many volunteers.
We will also support the next generation of volunteers.
The Dortmund firefighters should have good and safe working conditions.
We want to make our city cleaner to also steadily increase the cleanliness in Dortmund.
Littering is not only an aesthetic nuisance, but also a major burden on the environment and nature.
We want to reduce littering from carelessly discarded cigarette butts in a positive, motivating way.
The enforcement of offences is to be continued together with the “Mülldetektive’ from the investigations department for waste.
We will work at the federal level to gradually and significantly increase the disposable plastic fund levy.
Climate and environmental protection are a task for society as a whole, says Dortmund mayor.
The consequences of climate change affect the weakest members of society first and hardest.
Dortmund must develop into a sponge city: by promoting the desegregation of areas, more water-permeable surfaces, rain.
The promotion of renewable energies is at the forefront, particularly the expansion of photovoltaic systems on the roofs of public and private buildings.
Dortmund already has one of the largest green areas of a major city in Germany, with 63 percent.
We want to achieve temporary and permanent shading on schoolyards, playgrounds and other public spaces ideally in combination with solar modules.
We also want to create more biotope systems, wildflower meadows, birdhouses and insect hotels and significantly reduce light pollution.
This also includes promoting urban agriculture, supporting ecological farms, urban farm projects and the principle of “edible” cities.
Dortmund Card will give children, young people and families with low incomes free or heavily discounted access to the city's leisure and cultural facilities.
We will continue to pursue this path consistently and now strengthen and expand the local library services.
With the "night mayor" we have given the club and bar culture a face and an important contact person.
Now we want to further develop the gastronomic offer in the districts.
SPD candidate for mayor of Dortmund, Jurgen Klopp, launches election programme.
Says city needs to modernise its swimming pools, sports facilities and pubs.
Also wants to make all municipal services digitally accessible in the long term.
Dortmund already has the largest online portfolio of any municipality, which it wants to expand in the future, he says.
He also wants to implement the principles of “Open Data” and ‘Open Government’ in practice in the near future.
The city of Dortmund is the largest employer in the city through DOKOM21.
We want to reduce fixed-term contracts and the employment of freelancers to a minimum.
Outsourcing will also be reduced and instead of purchasing external services, we will increasingly provide services ourselves.
The services provided by the Dortmund municipal authority must be even more closely aligned with the living situations of the people in theCity of Dortmund.
SPD candidate: Dortmund will become a smart city.
We will set up a comprehensive digital city map as an interactive map with information on construction sites, free parking spaces, charging stations, etc.
The investment backlog in NRW municipalities amounts to around 50 billion euros.
The focus of the distribution of the funds from the “Special Infrastructure Fund” must be on the cities and municipalities.
Dortmund will not use the property tax to ‘make money from our citizens’ and will keep the tax base constant until at least 2030.
We see municipal companies as an integral part of municipal self-government.
We reject the privatisation of goods or services of the public services.
The actions of municipal companies should be markedly different from those of private actors by being guided by the common good.