Dortmund can adopt the SPD Dortmund program for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025.
The city of Dortmund has shown in the past that it can change courageously and decisively.
The path from beer, coal and steel to a modern, diverse city is already clearly visible in many places.
We have managed to keep our course even in times of many crises.
The economic development of Dortmund since 2020 shows that we are a resilient and adaptable city that uses its traditional strengths and at the same time promotes new growth sectors.
For many people, the world is getting more and more out of control.
All the more so, it is our task to continue to offer solidarity and stability as well as anchors of democracy.
We want to continue to take responsibility for this city as the Dortmund SPD.
It is about stability in our city.
For a reliable, capable city that is there for its citizens.
Stability only exists with the SPD!
For almost eight decades now, we have been ensuring more progress and solidarity in our city.
This has been shown, not least, in the last few years in the city council.
We were the only ones to take the important decisions.
If you look at the list of important decisions, this is also overwhelmingly clear.
Our guiding principle has always been and will continue to be: to make the lives of the people in Dortmund better every day, bit by bit.
Dortmund is growing and becoming younger again.
We have been making record investments for years.
We are going back to the neighbourhoods as a city, with new places, better schools, and repaired streets.
We must and will continue to do so.
Can we afford it?
Yes, Dortmund can!
We are now at a crucial point in Dortmund.
We want to take advantage of the opportunities of a growing city.
So that the everyday life of the people does not just function, but gets better.
For us, two issues are central: We must reduce the cost of everyday life.
For this, housing and how much it costs is crucial.
That is why we must build more, socially and affordably, but also modern and sustainably.
In addition, we are putting the focus on family and education.
A younger city needs more childcare facilities and schools and it needs opportunities and jobs for everyone, so that families can secure their future.
Here too, we say to all citizens: Dortmund can do it!
We have spoken to the citizens over the past few months and have developed our program on the basis of this dialogue.
It is clear and concrete, as we are known for.
Because responsibility means exactly this: talking to all people in the entire city, taking the concerns of the neighborhoods seriously, solving problems.
We can do it!
Thomas Westphal | Mayor of the City of Dortmund Program of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025 Dortmund can provide affordable and modern housing.
Housing is a basic social need of people - in every city, in every district and in every neighborhood.
We know that housing is lacking, that rental and purchase prices are constantly rising and that publicly funded housing is lacking on a large scale.
At the same time, good and affordable housing as well as the social mix of residential areas are the key to a good coexistence in the city.
We must continue to build new homes.
However, new housing is not automatically affordable housing for those who need it.
The public sector must therefore become more involved in the housing market, including by purchasing existing housing.
Our goal remains to continue to create at least 2,000 new residential units per year in the coming years.
We will continue to maintain the mandatory 30 percent quota for publicly subsidized housing in new construction projects.
We will continue to build more communally and cooperatively.
With the newly founded municipal housing company in 2022 – the Dortmunder Stadtentwicklungsgesellschaft (DSG) – we have been able to launch the construction of affordable, modern and sustainable housing.
The first housing construction projects have since started and many more projects will follow in the coming years.
Since 2025, we have had a strong financial partner for the DSG at our side with the Sparkasse Dortmund.
We want the city to make more land available to the DSG in the future than was previously planned, in order to be able to build significantly more publicly subsidized and affordable housing.
The housing cooperatives in our city – both established and Together with them and the many social institutions, we want to expand alternative forms of housing such as assisted living, multi-generational living and cluster living throughout the city.
However, new homes for trainees and students are also an essential part of this.
We will actively promote this through the allocation of privileged land.
Speculation with land must be prevented as effectively as possible.
We want to avoid the sale of municipal land to private housing investors in principle and, if necessary, link it to strict conditions.
The allocation should be carried out either by means of a ground lease or by sale with a contractually agreed pre-emption right and a building obligation.
At the same time, we are striving for a socially oriented municipal land reserve policy in order to curb the enormous increases in land prices.
The proceeds from land sales should benefit a corresponding municipal land fund.
We want to bring control over building areas back to the city.
In this central social issue, the power of action must lie with the city and not be left to those who seek quick profits.
To achieve this, the municipal right of first refusal must be used consistently, even if it is not clear at the time of purchase what will happen to the land or buildings.
We will only approve larger building areas if the city can acquire ownership of significant portions of the building area – and at reasonable prices.
We want to develop a corresponding social land strategy with all affected parties.
We will also use the instrument of the preservation of the living environment zoning in a targeted manner where speculation with living space creates modern neighborhoods – intelligent building.
By simplifying procedures and making a moderate adjustment to standards, we must ensure that the construction of living space is practical and affordable – the acute explosion of construction costs must be contained.
There must be no loss of quality in terms of living standards.
Serial building, SPD Dortmund program for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025, modular construction, alternative building materials and the consideration of the Hamburg standard can provide valuable support here.
We must not be wasteful with our limited space.
Therefore, we want to prioritize multi-story apartment construction – with attractive and barrier-free – including wheelchair-access Where it fits into the cityscape, we also want to allow higher buildings, for example, by adding storeys over supermarkets or parking areas.
We want to promote housing exchange programmes more than before.
Local provision of the most important facilities for daily life is an essential component of liveable neighbourhoods.
This includes access to doctors' surgeries, markets, meeting places and recreational areas, clubs, care services, childcare facilities and schools.
In new building areas, we will ensure that the construction of these facilities is always taken into account, so that existing structures are not overloaded.
We will link every new building project to public local transport, with a connection to the cycle network and, of course, to the fibre-optic network.
The local residents will always be involved in the planning of the neighbourhoods.
Tenant protection is a priority for us.
We want tenants to be even better protected against abuse, misuse and unjustified rent increases.
We demand that the rent brake, the tightened cap on regular rent increases and the notice period should also be applied in Dortmund, among other things, because our housing market has been extremely tense for several years due to the low vacancy rate.
That is why we are also taking action against commercial rentals via relevant online portals.
We will also examine which instruments can be used to extend the duration of occupancy rights and social bonds.
We will ensure that the city continues to actively take all its legal options against unacceptable living conditions in “dilapidated properties” in the future – if necessary, even with so-called “replacement measures” that hold landlords (financially) accountable.
To this end, we will strengthen the housing supervision with additional staff.
Administrative offences in tenancy agreements can be prosecuted most effectively where they are committed and where there is a direct interest in their prosecution.
That is why the state of North Rhine-Westphalia must transfer the implementation of such administrative offences (for example Section 5 of the Economic Penal Code) to the municipalities by means of a legal ordinance.
The legally prescribed protection of tenants as well as the prosecution of offences must be able to be carried out by the municipality.
We will ensure that the guidelines for the cost of accommodation are regularly adjusted and that those receiving social benefits have access to good, subsidised housing.
People with a negative Schufa entry must be given a chance to rent an apartment from the municipal housing companies DOGEWO and DSG.
Equal educational opportunities for all working families can be the focus of social democratic local politics.
The goal of creating good framework conditions for families is at the forefront.
This means: educational and care facilities close to home, well-maintained playgrounds, schoolyards and sufficient opportunities for children and young people to spend time and be free.
In addition, there needs to be enough childcare facilities, both in terms of personnel and equipment.
SPD Dortmund Programme for the Municipal Elections on 14 September 2025Early childhood education - reliable and free of charge The kindergarten is the first educational institution that a child goes through.
Early participation in high-quality early childhood education is of decisive importance for equal opportun Therefore, we want to meet the demand for places in daycare centers and child daycare in Dortmund and to remove barriers to participation.
That is why we will make significantly more funds available for the expansion of places and, as a city, we will completely abolish the daycare fees in order to enable participation and equal opportunities from the beginning.
It is clear to us Social Democrats that education must be free of charge from the beginning.
In addition, we are also relying on a free and healthy lunch for all children in daycare centers, child daycare and school.
We will adequately finance early childhood education by considering the abolition, or at least a gradual reduction, of the share of the operators in the operation of long-standing institutions.
The city of Dortmund already takes over the share of the operator for newer institutions.
We will also continue to expand the municipal child daycare center operator FABIDO.
We will financially support the subsidized education of educators in order to recruit more staff.
Only by strengthening child daycare and daycare center operators will it be possible to close the current gaps in places.
We are committed to an annual adjustment of the on More and more often, parents with their children are standing in front of locked kindergarten doors.
The lack of reliability of the system is a daily challenge for working families, which affects both their private lives and their careers.
When so many facilities restrict opening hours, can take in fewer children, close groups or even have to go offline completely, this shows how the kindergarten providers have to make do with very little.
The shortage of skilled workers and inadequate funding by the state of North Rhine-Westphalia force providers to reduce staffing levels and cut training places.
The regional economy also suffers from the additional shortage of skilled workers, if the children of their employees cannot be reliably cared for.
However, a reliable offer is also necessary for the children themselves, in order to ensure a structured daily routine, to meet their needs and also to support their early education and development.
We can win additional skilled workers through attractive working conditions and, not least, through comprehensive remuneration of the training for the field of early childhood education.
Skilled workers must be relieved of non-pedagogical tasks by additional staff.
In addition to kindergarten help We need a comprehensive offensive for skilled workers and additional staff in the facilities.
Only in this way can well-trained pedagogical staff be won for the Kitas and the day care.
The current financing system for Kitas and child care is responsible for many of the current problems.
The KiBiz (Children's Education Act) here in NRW is particularly responsible for its current financing logic.
That is why it is important to change the financing logic to adequate financing of the facilities.
A secure base financing would solve many problems.
Wage increases must be compensated promptly and completely.
Dortmund can have modern schools.
We write large about equal opportunities for all children and young people.
We do not ask where someone comes from, but where someone wants to go in the future!
The educational facilities in our city must be the most practical, efficient and modern buildings that we as a city can offer, so that everyone can see that we are investing actively in the future of our coming generations.
SPD Dortmund’s program for the local elections on September 14, 2025Our schools must become “beacons” The city’s task is to ensure good external framework conditions for a good school – teaching content and teaching personnel are a state task – by means of a large, billion-worth school construction program.
In the past five years, we have been able to modernize many previously dilapidated school buildings and construct urgently needed extensions with this program.
And we are far from finished.
We are investing in the future and will use the Dortmund share of the new “infrastructure special fund” in a targeted manner for investments in the education sector, so that crumbling plaster, dirty toilets and no longer up-to-date classrooms will finally be a thing of the past.
The better framework conditions will promote learning and benefit both children and teachers.
We want to resolve the backlog of investments more quickly than before.
We remain digital pioneers Since 2020, we have gradually connected all schools digitally with fast internet and high-performance WLAN.
All students have their own tablet, so that digital learning can be achieved un Together with DOKOM21, we have already significantly improved IT support at schools with the IT campus managers.
We will permanently stabilize and continue this relief and support for teachers.
Devices that are now outdated must be replaced in the coming years.
We will not save on this, but will invest consistently and continuously.
We continue to demand a Digital Package 2.0 from the federal government and the state, because these additional financial burdens should not be borne solely by the city.
Rethinking full-day care.
The origin of a child still plays a decisive role in their educational opportunities.
Furthermore, the quality of the educational offerings also depends on the financial strength of a city like Dortmund.
This should not be the case and must change!
Fees should not burden family income.
Full-day care is part of the educational chain for us and should therefore be accessible free of charge to all children in Dortmund with legal entitlement.
The goal must be genuine freedom of choice of learning for all who have earned their name.
We will set our own standards for rooms, staff and the educational design of the open all-day school (OGS).
This will create a framework so that, for example, existing OGS staff can be trained.
In the next four years we will implement the legal entitlement to full-time education in primary schools and create enough places for all children.
Our educational objective is to create a rhythmic full-day school throughout the city.
This means that the times for lessons and relaxation can be sensibly divided between the morning and afternoon.
By rhythmicising the full-day school, the providers can create more full-time positions, which can greatly increase the attractiveness of OGS positions.
However, increasing the number of staff is also absolutely necessary from the perspective of the legal entitlement to an OGS place.
In the short term, concepts for the multifunctional use of classrooms must be combined with the expansion of the open day and the joint use of rooms for youth welfare.
With the model project “KinderCampus” at two locations, we have taken the first important steps and will develop this ambitiously.
Cooperation with clubs and voluntary initiatives in the respective district is crucial for success.
These institutions will therefore be involved in the planning at an early stage and will provide advice on the further design and integration of the concept.
The best offers for children in the areas of sport, health, nutrition, music, art, theater, self-confidence and digitalization must be systematically networked on site.
Multifunctional classrooms make it possible to create central locations for offers, for example from clubs and associations, even after school and OGS and to provide children, young people and families with a familiar environment with less logistical planning.
Program of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025.
Realizing equal opportunities.
Our goal is to enable every child and young person the best possible support and education.
Learning paths remain open through longer joint learning Since 2020, we have been able to initiate three more comprehensive schools, which will all be up and running in the coming years.
At the same time, we need to significantly strengthen educational institutions in socially disadvantaged districts with poor structural conditions, and equip them with additional teachers, educational specialists and financial resources.
The “Startchancenprogramm” of the Federal Government, among others, provides us with the opportunity to do this.
The concept of kindergartens and primary schools as family centers continues to offer a good starting point for better supporting and advising families.
School social work is an important and indispensable element at schools.
School social workers offer individual advice and help to students with personal, family or social problems.
School social work strengthens the individual competencies of students and helps to recognize and prevent conflicts, violence or bullying at an early stage.
The expansion of school social work is a key goal for us: we achieve this result with more personnel and thereby improve the care ratio.
But children’s and youth psychology must also be strengthened on site.
The profound social change and the increasing digitalisation are changing the world of work and life comprehensively.
Against this background, the educational content and the competencies to be acquired must adapt to this new reality, so that children and young people can participate and lead a self-determined life.
For this, we want to promote interdisciplinary thinking and strengthen the self-efficacy experiences of students.
Extracurricular learning locations and offers are a matter of course for us - the project "Learning to think differently" is a successful example.
We also want to involve the students directly.
This includes, in particular, the redesign of break and classrooms as well as schoolyards.
The swimming promotion programme "Every child should learn to swim" that we have promoted will be continued jointly with the municipal sports association permanently after 2026.
The project to establish a "Dortmund movement model" for the holistic movement, sports and talent promotion for children and young people will be evaluated in 2026 and, if possible, continued in other suitable districts.
Dortmund can provide spaces for youth.
Just today, where school takes up more and more time, our children We want children and young people to be creative and to be able to try things out.
We understand that children and young people are not little adults and that they need space and time for themselves, which we enable them to experience real participation for all children and young people, to learn democracy and to be able to shape their living environment.
Wherever possible, children and young people should therefore be able to manage their own budgets in areas that affect their living reality.
We will strengthen low-threshold participation formats (for example themed youth conferences) and existing networks such as the Youth Ring.
This means that these formats must be needs-oriented and made possible with a close spatial reference.
The participation concept of the city, which was agreed upon on our initiative for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025, we want to implement vigorously and equip with more financial resources.
To enhance the Youth Leader Card (JuLeiCa), we would like to enable young people to receive more discounts and make a contribution to the Deutschlandticket possible.
Meeting places for young people must be made possible.
The existing facilities of open children's and youth work and local area work must The infrastructure of free children and youth work must be maintained and strengthened.
We also want to strengthen the clubs behind it and the volunteers and give them enough appreciation.
The facilities are an indispensable treasure for the neighborhoods.
And yet the lack of space for young people is a big issue: There is a shortage of youth centers, meeting places and leisure activities.
For young people there is often no more space.
No place where they can "just be".
Therefore we need more and longer opened youth centers in our neighborhoods, which are modern and visible in the cityscape, and suitable youth-friendly outdoor areas with enough seating.
These must be designed independently by the children and young people.
This strengthens democracy and self-efficacy.
Meeting outside - child's play!
We will build new playgrounds and renovate existing ones.
The municipal playground regulations must be revised for this purpose.
The design of the playgrounds should be attractive, close to nature and child-friendly.
They should promote fine and gross motor skills, strengthen the sense of balance and offer relaxation opportunities.
Playgrounds should be accessible to all children and designed to be barrier-free.
Housing associations are also obliged to regularly maintain and repair the playgrounds on their premises.
Safety must be ensured through regular inspections.
Tenants should be involved in the design of the playgrounds.
Opportunities for co-determination and joint use should be created.
They should become places of common life.
The city of Dortmund is ensuring that the revised playing field regulations are enforced and implemented through measures taken by the authorities responsible for public order.
The aim is that all playing fields that fall within the scope of the regulations will meet the new requirements.
We want to keep schoolyards as open as possible.
They are not just break times, but also offer young people space, opportunities to play and sports after school.
However, we also need to protect them from vandalism and abuse.
Fences are, in principle, the last resort.
If schoolyards have to be fenced in, we will ensure that the play and sports facilities are available until late in the evening.
We reject the use of ultrasonic transmitters to drive young people away.
We want to extend the successful model of the Nordstadtliga to as many districts of the city as possible.
We want to strengthen and develop media education in open children's and youth work.
Social media have become part of youth culture - with great opportunities, but also risks.
Children and young people should get to know and try out the creative possibilities, but also learn how to protect themselves from the dangers (such as addiction risks, misinformation, bullying or sexual violence).
Program of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025Dortmund can be a solidary city of neighbours Social cohesion in cities is crucial for a peaceful and pleasant living together.
In urban spaces, people of the most diverse origins, cultures and lifestyles meet.
Shared values, mutual respect and active cooperation strengthen the sense of community and promote trust in each other.
Dortmund is growing.
For newcomers, we would therefore like to offer a welcome package that introduces them to the city, conveys its history and shows new Dortmunders that they are now part of the city, so that they feel at home in Dortmund for a long time.
Meeting places such as parks, neighbourhood centres, citizens' houses or cultural events create space for encounter and exchange.
Social justice and equal opportunities also play a central role, so that all people can feel like they are part of the community.
Only through solidarity and co-creation can a city be truly inclusive and sustainable.
We will create more decentralised offers and places for people to meet each other in the individual districts of the city.
We need more open community centres and similar meeting places for as many target groups as possible in our city society – regardless of whether they are young or old, with a small or large wallet, because social life does not only take place in the city centre, but above all in our neighbourhoods.
This is what makes us Dortmund!
Therefore, we will bring offers and events in the areas of leisure, youth, culture and sport more “into the area” than has been the case so far and create the necessary social infrastructure.
We want to particularly promote the various district festivals, the local clubs and the customs.
Our city is characterised by diversity, solidarity and a shared history of arrival.
We want to offer students the opportunity to actively deal with the history and present of our city – across generations, inclusively and creatively.
This is how we want This can take the form of class visits, neighbourhood tours, exhibitions or digital projects in cooperation with local initiatives and cultural institutions, which show that our city is diverse – and belongs to everyone who lives here.
In particular, the exchange between younger and older citizens makes such projects valuable and lively.
Many school projects today fail because funding is not possible.
However, there are many offers and foundations that support and finance such projects.
Unfortunately, there is no transparent overview of these.
That is why we want to create a catalogue to help schools get an overview of funding opportunities and to make contact.
This overview should be updated annually.
Engagement deserves respect.
Volunteer work in clubs is an important pillar of social life in the neighbourhoods.
It creates community, promotes cohesion and enriches the cultural and sporting offerings locally.
Whether in the sports club, the senior citizens' club, the volunteer fire brigade or the youth club – committed citizens invest their time and energy to make life in the neighbourhood more vibrant and more supportive.
Volunteer work not only strengthens the community, but also gives people the opportunity to take responsibility and actively participate in the development of their environment in a democratic way.
We will help to find spaces for volunteer activities and make the existing offer more visible and better coordinated.
We will promote volunteer work and improve its appreciation – where possible, also financially.
Strong prevention is the best social policy.
Social institutions must be preserved and strengthened.
We stand for the sustainable securing of the social network through the targeted further development of the performance and financing agreements with free providers of welfare and youth welfare.
We will strengthen prevention by continuing to promote effective prevention offers in the social sector and expanding them wherever possible.
We will significantly expand the counseling and support services in the districts, especially the outreach work, and continuously develop them.
Securing medical care and humane care – investing in prevention, for example through free health checks, awareness campaigns and healthy school meals, is crucial for us.
Access to medical care must also be ensured for all population groups, for example through health centres close to home.
This will improve the quality of life in our neighbourhoods in the long term.
Health is a crucial factor for a fulfilled and equal, participatory life.
We want to create low-threshold offers for the health of the people living here.
We stand by our municipal clinic, which makes a valuable contribution to our citizens as a house of maximum care.
Important modernisations are pending, including the new construction of the children's clinic, which is why we will continue to insist that the state of North Rhine-Westphalia finally fulfil its investment obligations adequately.
The new hospital reform is an important first step towards a new system of specialisation among clinics, we want to accompany this process critically and supportively, so that everyone receives the best care.
The number of people in need of care continues to rise, the need for support is becoming more extensive and more diverse – increasingly, these include people with a migration history and refugees.
We must therefore resolutely address the shortage of skilled workers.
We want to further develop the binding care needs planning in a needs This care planning is to be integrated into the age-appropriate development of the neighbourhood.
The aim is to provide care services that are tailored to the needs of the residents and are close to home, enabling them to live largely independently.
The provision of care services in the neighbourhood is to be mutually reinforcing and complementary.
We will promote the development of residential and care facilities in the neighbourhood and will expand communal and inclusive living arrangements accordingly.
The care and housing advice service will be significantly expanded and short-term care will be further developed to provide practical relief for families.
We will strengthen the care professions in Dortmund and will continue to pursue the city’s care campaign initiated by us in the coming years, to provide constructive support for the existing “care network”, to expand training places in the care sector and to develop new care and support models to provide the necessary help to people in difficult situations.
The health and social situation of people with addictions is a major problem.
We see addiction prevention and support for people with drug, medication or alcohol addictions as a central social task.
We must pay more attention to children in families affected by addiction and ensure their protection together with We will ensure the staffing for the low-threshold offers.
New premises are urgently needed to be able to continue to handle the diverse tasks of addiction support.
We would therefore like to relieve the drug consumption room at Grafenhof with the help of another location in the city center.
We will effectively and sustainably combat homelessness in Dortmund through a combination of social support, preventive and intelligent individual political measures.
The central goals of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025 are the expansion of affordable housing and low-threshold emergency accommodation as well as programs such as "Housing First", in which those affected first receive a home and then social support.
Young adults and women must be given special attention here.
In addition, access to psychosocial counseling, addiction therapy and professional reintegration is crucial.
Close cooperation between authorities, aid organizations and civil society creates long-term prospects and strengthens social cohesion.
We must show a clear stance against fascism!
Anti-fascism has always been a cornerstone of social democratic thinking and action.
The people of Dortmund have repeatedly shown in impressive ways that human-hostile ideologies have no chance in our city.
Nevertheless, there is the possibility that a right-wing extremist and populist party will be elected to the city council and district assemblies in the upcoming elections.
If this happens, we will exclude any form of cooperation with representatives of this party.
Parties that despise our constitution and the constitutionally guaranteed equality of all people do not stand on democratic ground.
Excluding cooperation means that we will not elect any of their representatives to official positions such as committee chairpersons.
We will not agree to any of their motions, as the AfD as a whole pursues a contemptible and right-wing extremist worldview that we do not want to legitimize.
United for diversity, tolerance, and democracy!
We will continue to actively support the work of the municipal coordination office for diversity, tolerance, and democracy and use it together with many social partners to promote a good and peaceful coexistence and to inform about social developments.
We shape We also want to win over the sceptical people and convince them that living together in diversity can work.
We stand by our humanitarian responsibility and will continue to accept people who have to flee their home.
Dortmund is to be a safe haven for refugees as part of the national alliance of cities.
We welcome and support the great and diverse commitment of people to the reception and integration of refugees.
Refugees should continue to be housed in a decentralised manner.
We also continue to support the work of the LSBTIQ* coordination office, implement the recently approved action plan for the acceptance of sexual and gender diversity and the measures described therein and continue to promote the full-time office of the SLADO.
Queer people need places to develop.
We will continue to create these spaces.
Education and information are essential for a diverse Dortmund!
A gender-equal city has not yet been achieved.
Equality and equal rights for all genders have not yet been achieved.
Women are still structurally disadvantaged in many areas of life, excluded from participation and their interests are invisible.
People of different sexual orientations and identities are often subject to discrimination.
Here we are obliged to work in the commune for more equality and against discrimination.
The work of women's advice centres and women's shelters must be expanded.
We want to make their offers even more visible.
We also continue to rely on advice centres and support services for victims of sexual violence.
We want to expand the area of sexual education, especially in the sense of the self-strengthening of children and young people.
This is part of the SPD Dortmund's programme for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025.
In addition, the information and sensitisation of parents and primary caregivers in the child's environment is an important factor in successful prevention work, which we want to strengthen.
We are strengthening prevention as well as the advice and support of people who involuntarily become involved in prostitution or are victims of human trafficking.
The sexual exploitation of minors for the financial enrichment of third parties is not “child prostitution”, but a serious crime.
We want to counteract this, also by informing children, young people and their parents about their rights and about criminal law.
We will continue to support the Mitternachtsmission e.V.
financially and will develop strategies to combat this exploitation and violence together with all relevant actors.
The work of the Equal Opportunities Office with all the different topics from the compatibility of family and work to safety in public spaces to interest representation is indispensable for Dortmund.
We will continue to work together with the Equal Opportunities Office and strengthen its role in the city.
Dortmund is internationally important International work is important for the perception of an open, democratic and innovative city.
In particular, the town twinning, but also cooperation beyond this in international networks and partnerships, make a major contribution to establishing Dortmund as an international city.
Dortmund is setting a good example in promoting inter-municipal work and thus contributing to a continuous development of the city administration and city society.
Dortmund will continue to show solidar The exchange and cooperation with our neighbours in Europe helps us to further develop Dortmund as a city with a high quality of life.
As “climate twins”, we can learn from other cities in southern Europe, for example, how we can adapt to climate change.
Children and young people should be more involved in shaping Dortmund.
An application for the title of European Youth Capital will help to strengthen and expand participation formats and create more offers for young people in Dortmund.
We also need a greater variety of international exchange formats, with which we can bring international youth work forward.
We are strengthening European work and expanding it by increasing educational opportunities.
The Interrail ticket for young people should be offered.
The International Garden Exhibition will take place in Dortmund in 2027.
The “international” should be reflected through the involvement of partners from all over the world and local people and show Dortmund as the open-minded, innovative and attractive location it is.
The city is also applying for international major events in the future to increase Dortmund's visibility - the city is also to present itself more internationally at trade fairs, major events and forums to become better known.
Dortmund benefits from European funding.
In order for this to continue, Dortmund must work together with other cities to promote an EU cohesion policy from 2028, which is based on the proven principles of shared resource management and multi-level governance.
Dortmund can innovate and provide good jobs.
Dortmund is a growing city with more than 615,000 inhabitants.
The city's economy is diversified, i.e.
broadly based.
Knowledge and information, research and technology are the most important factors for growth and development.
This protects our city from the consequences of major structural crises, such as those currently observed in the manufacturing industry and the automotive sector.
The image of the "economic centipede" is adhered to.
A maximum diversification of the Dortmund economic landscape is our clear goal.
We are committed to the Dortmund steel site.
Domestic production and further processing of climate-friendly steel is strategically necessary.
Because: Steel is the future!
SPD Dortmund program for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025.
A look at the most important macroeconomic indicators proves: In Dortmund there has been no insolvency wave or mass layoffs so far, employment subject to social insurance continues to be at an historically high level, investment activity in Dortmund continues to develop well and the office market is stable.
As the “heart of social democracy”, we in Dortmund attach particular importance to good work.
We see work not only as an economic factor, but also as a way to participate, self-realization and meaning-making.
That is why we want to facilitate ways into and on the labor market and support initiatives for the gender-appropriate transformation of the world of work (for example to:Do – Dortmund’s new world of work, Dortmund Dialog of the GFS and others), which will help us to accompany the digital and ecological change.
Economic area strategy – sustainable and future-oriented In order to ensure that all of this remains the same, a solid economic policy with an economic area strategy is needed, which aims to ensure sustainable and future-oriented development of economic areas for an ever-growing city.
In view of the economic dynamics and the ongoing population growth, it is expected that economic opportunities and requirements will continue to increase in the future.
The joint discussion with trade unions, works councils, chambers of industry, commerce and crafts, as well as other local stakeholders, is a central guiding principle for us for local development.
Investments by large companies in recent years (for example the construction of the ICE works at Dortmund harbour and the RRX maintenance works in Dortmund-Eving) show that Dortmund needs economic areas for modern, future-proof businesses in the real economy.
The results of the economic area conference held from 2022 to 2023 have led to the development of an economic area strategy that is intended to lay the foundation for a future-oriented, sustainable and inclusive development of economic area development in Dort Existing industrial areas will remain in place as long as they are functioning.
For new and additional uses when logistics sites are abandoned, we will prioritize the branch focus areas already mentioned.
The city's task is to provide a quantitatively, qualitatively and locally balanced range of standard commercial areas, taking into account a catalogue of criteria to be developed by the economic development agency.
The strategic acquisition and targeted development of land in Dortmund and outside the city will support and promote the economic development of the city with an active land market strategy.
The planning reserve held by the city for the next 15 years will be limited to 100 hectares of potential land.
The development of land must follow an economic land use strategy, which must be evaluated regularly, and will only be implemented following a decision by the city council.
The sustainable further development and optimization of existing commercial and brownfield sites will take precedence over development in open spaces.
The city administration will present a concept for the further development of the city, which will include a comprehensive land monitoring system that will continuously collect data on the availability and potential use of commercial land, as well as the need for new land.
Before new industrial The re-designation of an industrial area in the open space will only take place if the land acquisition, further development and densification of existing industrial areas can no longer be proven.
If this is the case, we will advise on this area after thorough examination and bring about a decision.
SPD Dortmund Program for the Municipal Election on September 14, 2025.
Creating good prospects and new innovations.
Combating long-term and youth unemployment is and remains a central social and economic challenge for us here in the Ruhr area.
Young people in particular need prospects, educational opportunities and targeted support in the transition to the labor market.
For this purpose, we have significantly expanded the successful project “Training in the Neighborhood” for the coordination and training of young people with low educational qualifications and will continue to develop it accordingly in the future.
We will continue to work to ensure that the municipal employment promotion company for Dortmund can be established with the companies of the municipal economy and local employers.
We will modernize and renovate the vocational colleges with the funds from the “Infrastructure Special Fund”.
For long-term unemployed people, qual We will continue and develop the municipal employment strategy.
In this context, we will continue and, if necessary, establish good projects for promoting employment and combating unemployment in order to attract skilled workers.
We also want to promote the development of social innovations and innovative measures to reduce unemployment.
This will not only promote participation, but also strengthen social cohesion in Dortmund.
We must continue to provide good framework conditions for company foundations (for example Start-ups) so that private individuals and companies can invest.
We also want to strengthen cooperatively organised structures.
The working conditions, quality of the workplace and opportunities for co-determination in start-ups and other companies supported by the city, as well as in public procurement, must be kept in view together with the trade unions and funding must be tied to conditions for well-paid, collectively agreed and secure work.
Ultimately, economic success must also benefit employees in their wallets.
But for us, it also means promoting innovations in the workplace, because “new work” is more than just a fruit basket or table football in the office.
We will continue to expand our successful technology center model and resolutely drive forward and support new locations of innovation, such as the DigitalQuartier in the northern Speicherstraße and the new EnergieCampus at the former Kokerei Hansa.
We will implement the agreed “Masterplan Wissenschaft” (Master Plan for Science) more strongly and use all available potential in the integration of knowledge from the research, technology and science location of Dortmund with local companies and public institutions.
We will make the public sector in Dortmund a strategic buyer for digital technologies and applied AI solutions.
In this way, we will simultaneously promote new technologies through greater regional demand and develop a modern, efficient administration.
A liveable city and good local supply The attractiveness of our city center is crucial to maintaining it as a lively center of social life.
In addition to a diverse range of retail outlets, we need quality of stay, green spaces, diverse cultural and educational offers and good accessibility for all.
City centers should be places of encounter, experience and identification – not just shopping locations.
Here we are also creating play areas for children, so that families are happy to come to the city and the city stay is also an These are to be stocked with discounted menstrual products and to create changing facilities throughout the building, regardless of gender.
Through targeted measures such as the redesign of public spaces, the promotion of catering, events and creative industries, we will continue to strengthen the attractiveness of our city and our subcentres, so that they remain lively, future-proof places that are popular with people in Dortmund, the districts and from outside.
We will therefore closely and constructively accompany the newly launched city management.
Programme of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025.
Retail and local trade play a central role in lively and liveable neighbourhoods.
They not only ensure a local supply, but also create jobs, strengthen the community and promote social encounters in our neighbourhoods.
Through their presence, they contribute significantly to the attractiveness of residential areas.
At the same time, supporting local businesses - for example through cheaper rents in municipal properties - actively helps to counteract the increasing vacancy rates.
Because empty shop premises reduce the quality of life, deter visitors and can lead to entire streets being deserted in Our goal is to better connect the various modes of transport and to give all residents the opportunity to sustainably abandon their individual modes of transport.
Therefore, we will ambitiously expand public bus and tram services.
For this, the transport system must become more reliable.
The transfer times must be noticeably shortened, even on holidays and at off-peak times.
The newly introduced frequency of the tram on the route between the harbor and the market street is only the beginning of many more frequency increases, because only in this way can we encourage many more people to switch to climate-friendly modes of transport.
We want a local transport system that is friendly to working people and that is close to their lives.
Many working people have their workplace in neighboring municipalities or come from these municipalities to their workplaces in our city.
However, the offer to these non-VRR neighboring municipalities such as Schwerte or Unna is insufficient and therefore difficult or even impossible to use for people with early, late and night shifts.
We want to change this.
Therefore, we want to achieve a timetable and line expansion to the hubs in our neighboring municipalities, which reliably brings working In addition to expansion and improvements to existing transportation, we will ensure that the extension of the U44 over the Westfalenhütte to Kirchderne finally comes – we will work hard to make this happen.
We will also push forward the extension of other tram lines and adapt the existing concepts to the future.
We will push forward the connection of the H-Bahn network from the university to the U42 “Theodor-Fliedner-Heim” stop and further expand the connection of the city center of Hombrück to the university.
In order to meet these requirements, in the future, the procurement of vehicles and the staffing of DSW21 must be aligned accordingly.
In recent years, the police and the public order office have already taken measures to contain the noise pollution caused by the racing and tuning scene.
Although much of this was effective, there are still frequent complaints about loud exhaust noises, horn concerts and also littering in the “box alleyways” of the scene.
We will carry out an evaluation of the measures taken so far in coordination with the police and, if necessary, tighten them up again soon, for example through more frequent regular checks and the use We want to include the night express network in this.
With the new ring bus line 400 in the city center, we are creating, together with an attractive schedule, meaningful connections between bus and train in the future.
SPD Dortmund program for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025.
Accessible and affordable on the go.
We want to finally make all stops in Dortmund accessible to people with disabilities and parents with strollers and will therefore consistently continue the barrier-free expansion with platforms.
The barrier-free access on lines U43, U44 and U47 must be achieved.
We will significantly shorten the maintenance intervals for elevators and escalators in the light rail facilities and will remedy any disruptions more quickly than before.
We will continue to expand bus stops in a barrier-free manner and illuminate them extensively to avoid fear spaces and increase safety.
At suitable light rail stops, we will create additional Park&Ride and Bike&Ride spaces with affordable combination tickets, so that the transfer to bus and train is easier.
We demand that social ticket offers may never be more expensive than the monthly basic allowance for Making cycling easy Cycle paths are only good if they can be used by people of all ages.
The aim is to continue to expand the cycle network, to create safe, as wide and clearly marked cycle lanes as possible and to close any gaps that are not justifiable.
We will create safe connections between the districts and the city centre with the new cycle route system that is currently being implemented.
We will also provide as many secure, covered and lockable cycle parking spaces as possible.
In addition, we will also offer a simple orientation system for occasional cyclists with the establishment of a node system, which will enable them to reach their desired destination safely and easily from any point.
Roads and paths in good condition The condition of many roads, footpaths and cycle paths is rightly criticised.
The survey of the condition of the roads in Dortmund has shown that large parts of the Dortmund road network are in need of renovation.
The city council has decided on a road offensive with a budget of 25 million euros for the years 2024 and 2025, which will change this and drive forward the renovation of roads – without any financial burden on residents.
There is a considerable need With the road offensive, we are starting right there.
In addition to the short-term maintenance measures, a special focus is placed on repair and renewal, which are designed to improve the condition of the roads in the long term.
Therefore, selected road sections (neighborhoods) in all twelve districts of the city will be renovated from 2024 to 2025.
We will continue this necessary renovation program after 2025 and increase the budget.
Unsafe intersections, missing safety strips or poor lighting affect the safety perception of road users, and we want to remedy this as part of the road offensive.
Driving change with new ideas To make the choice of means of transportation more free, we will expand the car and bike sharing offer throughout the city.
We want to keep passing cars out of residential areas and the immediate city center through clever traffic control systems.
We will make residential streets traffic-calmed and free from through traffic with clever traffic management for the safety of both residents and their children.
We will pay particular attention to the traffic situation and delivery traffic, especially in front of schools.
We continue to stand up for the city of short distances and want With the new parking management system in the city center, we have taken an important first step.
We will continue to ensure that the parking garages in the city are always cheaper than the above-ground parking spaces, in order to create more space for pedestrians and cyclists.
We consider streets in the city center and residential areas that are blocked by parked cars to be unattractive.
That is why we want to ensure that cars can park more in neighborhood parking garages and develop further innovative concepts for this, while at the same time continuing to provide parking spaces for delivery people, people with disabled parking permits, residents and tradespeople.
We will expand the network of electric charging stations throughout the city, involve our energy supplier DEW21 more closely and simplify the regulations for this.
We also want to create the possibility for tenants without their own property and garage to charge their electric car at a reasonable price.
Charging electric cars in public spaces must not be much more expensive for tenants without their own charging facilities than for homeowners.
It should also be possible to try out new innovations and ideas for revitalizing public spaces, as well as Safety is one of the basic requirements for a liveable city.
We therefore want a Dortmund in which people can feel safe at all times and in all places.
In addition to the preventive work in the social and youth sectors with the social service providers, who combat crime before it arises, we want the authorities, police and administrative offices to continue to work together well and in an uncomplicated manner, to continue the partnerships for maintaining order and to consistently take action against criminal offences and administrative offences.
We want to increase the sense of security of the people and the cleanliness of our city, to reduce areas of fear and conflict.
Safe on the move We want an administrative office that is there for the people when they need it.
We will therefore expand the availability and presence of the Kommunaler Ordnungsdienst (KOD) at weekends and in the evening.
The employees of the KOD and the traffic supervisors will be optimally prepared for their important work.
We will ensure better lighting of popular paths, streets, parks and underpasses.
This will reduce areas of fear and increase the subjective sense of security.
At the same time, we will prevent increased light emissions The promotion of quality of life is a central component for us in avoiding neglect and vandalism of public spaces.
The first step is to create a map with the help of low-threshold citizen participation (including digital) to record the spaces that cause fear.
There should be regular updates on the current state of the area.
Then it can be tracked what has happened and whether it has helped.
People who save lives deserve recognition and support.
The fire department and aid organizations also make a very important contribution to the safety of people in Dortmund every day.
We especially recognize the work of the many volunteers.
We want to strengthen and secure this voluntary commitment.
We want to expand our cooperation with aid organizations in the long term.
Program of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on September 14.
September 2025We want to work towards improving the transparency, attention and recognition of voluntary work through better public relations.
We will also support the next generation of volunteers.
This includes, for example, the digital equipment of the youth fire brigade.
The Dortmund firefighters should have good and safe working conditions for their valuable work.
We will therefore secure, develop and strengthen the building and technical infrastructure.
In addition, we will examine whether we can further strengthen the emergency services through more digitalisation and better networking.
We want to make our city cleaner To also steadily increase the cleanliness in Dortmund, we want to continue to take a more consistent approach to environmental pollution and illegal rubbish dumps.
This also includes the consistent removal of scrap cars and bicycles in public spaces.
The enforcement of offences is to be continued together with the “Mülldetektive” from the investigations department for waste.
In addition, the strengthening of reusable packaging and deposit systems in gastronomy, trade and at events is an important component for us to avoid waste in our city.
We will work at the federal level to gradually and significantly increase the disposable plastic fund levy so that packaging manufacturers make a greater contribution to waste prevention.
The additional revenue from the fund will be used for meaningful measures by the EDG for more cleanliness.
We would like to promote the “ReUse & Repair Center” principle by setting up city-supported repair centers, exchange markets and second-hand hubs.
A well-equipped EDG helps us to create a clean cityscape.
We want to reduce littering from carelessly discarded cigarette butts in a positive, motivating way.
These are not only an aesthetic nuisance, but also a major burden on the environment and nature.
To this end, we will set up cigarette ashtrays in the form of “ballot bins” as a trial at heavily frequented locations such as bus stops and expand them on a success basis.
In addition, we would like to strengthen public relations and campaigns for targeted awareness-raising, education on proper disposal and the consequences of offenses.
The participation and support of citizens, for example We consider litter picking and sponsorship of green spaces to be extremely important.
The EDG has already created a successful tool with the "Dreck-petze-App" on the smartphone, which can be used to report incidents.
The litter situation in Nordstadt is still problematic.
The previous countermeasures are only of limited use.
We will evaluate with the EDG how the city's appearance can be significantly improved in the style of the city centre.
We want to work on new concepts that take greater account of the needs of the people.
Litter disposal must be oriented towards the possibilities of the people.
The reporting and booking of bulky waste must be simplified for this purpose, and controls and the work of the so-called litter detectives must be further strengthened.
The various responsibilities for areas, paths and spaces delay and entangle processes.
We want to counteract this by making the EDG responsible for this across the board.
In the context of rat control (not only) in Nordstadt, we need to take preventive action by providing information, advice and support.
The city's litter bins must be made rat-proof.
Climate and environmental protection are a task for society as a whole, which affects us all in our basic living conditions.
Politics, administration, science, clubs, associations and the economy, all citizens are called upon to stop climate change.
We have recognized the challenge early on and have been working for many years to ensure that the city takes on a leading role and a model function.
We want to further concretize the municipal action program on climate protection and adjust the goals if necessary, in order to use synergies and promote comprehensive urban development.
The consequences of climate change affect the weakest members of society first and hardest.
That is why we also understand climate and environmental protection as a social task that must be fulfilled in a socially just manner.
We are determined to tackle the energy transition.
The promotion of renewable energies is at the forefront, particularly the expansion of photovoltaic systems on the roofs of public and private buildings through funding programmes, tenant electricity models and solar obligation for new buildings.
We will make binding decisions on municipal heat planning to develop a city-wide plan for climate-neutral heat supply, including the use of waste heat, geothermal energy, heat networks and heat pumps.
We will use the new financial resources from the "Special Infrastructure Fund" for the energetic renovation of public buildings and will also support private owners with tailored and independent advice in the individual city districts.
We will continue to drive forward the conversion of the municipal vehicle fleet to a fully climate-neutral vehicle fleet.
Climate adaptation will be strengthened.
The climate change and in particular the heavy rainfall events of the past have shown that Dortmund must develop into a sponge city: by promoting the desegregation of areas, more water-permeable surfaces, rain With the mandatory greening of suitable roofs and facades in new buildings, we want to set new standards and introduce funding programmes for retrofitting.
Our large residential areas offer great potential for improving living conditions in extreme weather conditions.
These residential areas have almost exclusively flat roofs, which therefore offer the possibility of extensive greening and photovoltaics.
We will develop funding programmes to make conversion measures even more attractive for owners of suitable residential buildings.
In the future, we will examine the use of light-coloured asphalt to reduce heat islands when building or renovating roads.
More ecological greenery for our city.
Dortmund already has one of the largest green areas of a major city in Germany, with 63 percent.
With a new municipal greening strategy, we want to promote the expansion and stronger networking of green spaces, pocket parks, allotment gardens, vertical gardens, tree alleys and the desegregation of sealed urban areas.
We want to achieve temporary and permanent shading on schoolyards, playgrounds and other public spaces ideally in combination with solar modules.
We want to implement the biodiversity strategy that we have initi We want to create more biotope systems, wildflower meadows, birdhouses and insect hotels and significantly reduce light pollution.
This also includes promoting urban agriculture, supporting ecological farms, urban farm projects and the principle of “edible” cities (fruit trees, snack gardens, etc.).
In the future, we want to achieve only ecological maintenance in parks, cemeteries and green spaces, as far as possible without pesticides.
We want to resolutely implement the already agreed forestry concept.
This means more afforestation and resilience in the existing tree population, protection and care of forests in the city area and surrounding area for CO2 binding, leisure activities and biodiversity.
Tree sponsorships, environmental education in our educational institutions and information campaigns on the role of the forest in climate protection are also part of this.
Program of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025.
Dortmund can combine culture, sport and joie de vivre.
Culture connects – culture makes Dortmund strong.
We clearly commit ourselves to the municipal cultural institutions.
Dortmund’s institutional “high culture The Dortmund Theatre is already delighting audiences with its fantastic work across all genres – we want to continue to provide it with strong support and ensure its financial resources are sustainable.
We are particularly looking forward to the new Schauspielhaus and the Jungen Bühne.
We are committed to ensuring that the construction projects are completed quickly, as the financial resources have already been approved and planned.
The free cultural scene is also a key part of our city.
We want to not only maintain its variety and creativity, but also continue to promote it – through reliable funding, regular compensation for cost increases and greater visibility in the public eye.
Our goal is also to establish a cultural school in Dortmund to strengthen cultural education from a young age.
Libraries as vibrant places for everyone Our city and state library have been significantly improved and made more attractive in recent years – with more digital offerings and longer opening hours.
We will continue to pursue this path consistently and now strengthen and expand the local library services.
In particular, the local libraries should be strengthened and expanded as vibrant places of knowledge, encounter and cultural participation.
Enabling leisure time for everyone Whether it's the West But we know that not everyone can afford these experiences.
That is why we are campaigning for the Dortmund Card to be introduced properly, which will give children, young people and families with low incomes free or heavily discounted access to the city's leisure and cultural facilities.
And we want to examine how we can involve the offers of other institutions.
Promoting local diversity Local neighbourhood culture is the heart of our communities.
Street art, festivals, small stages – all of this makes Dortmund unique.
We want to protect and strengthen this diversity.
Together with the district councils, we want to take a close look at where the strengths lie and where there are gaps in the offerings.
From this, we will develop a targeted and needs-based cultural promotion.
It is important to us that culture is accessible in a low-threshold, cost-effective way and for everyone – especially for young people in the city districts.
That is why we are striving for a comprehensive analysis of the Dortmund cultural landscape in order to make our cultural policy even more targeted and future-oriented – in close dialogue with artists and citizens.
SPD Dortmund's program for the local elections on September 14, 2025.
Bringing more life into the night.
A city like Dortmund also lives at night!
Scene districts, clubs, bars and small program cinemas are important parts of our urban culture.
We will continue to ensure that new businesses can get started more easily - for example by supporting the search for space and real estate or by obtaining permits.
With the "night mayor" we have given the club and bar culture a face and an important contact person.
Now we want to further develop the gastronomic offer in the districts and actively support creative ideas.
Even smaller program cinemas should be more strongly supported - so that the nights in Dortmund are just as diverse and lively as the day.
The corner pub is a cultural asset in the Ruhr area.
It is not only a meeting place for drinking beer, but often also an important place for the cohesion of the neighborhood in the suburbs and for the local subculture.
We are setting up a focus on pub and subculture in the responsibility of the night mayor, which advises small pubs and cultural institutions that have fallen into Making our bathing landscape fit for the future Our swimming pools are a treasure that has accompanied many Dortmunders through life.
But they urgently need an update.
We want to start an investment offensive so that all the baths can be renovated and modernised.
This also includes: The operation should return to public ownership – for reliable, affordable access for all.
Upgrading sports facilities, enabling movement Many sports halls and sports grounds also urgently need renovation.
We want to take a close look at where the greatest need for action is and use the funds from the “Infrastructure Special Fund” specifically for this.
We also want to make our parks even more sports-friendly – with more sports equipment, table tennis tables and new football and basketball cages.
And because movement must be accessible to all, we will create more barrier-free toilet containers at outdoor sports facilities.
Dortmund can handle digitalisation and modern administration We want to make all municipal services digitally accessible in the long term, where possible.
These administrative services should be fully digitally processed from the application to the decision (end-to-end).
To this end, the administration should continue to pursue With the development of the Dortmund app, a future-oriented platform for services, messages and appointments has already been created.
The digital services offered by the city are to be made available in a barrier-free, as simple and low-threshold as possible.
Important steps have already been taken with the digitalisation of, among other things, building permit procedures, change of address, the social platform or the digital registration of motor vehicles and many other services.
The resident parking permit is to be digitalised, so that the car registration number is checked by the traffic department instead of the card in the windscreen, as is already possible with short-term parking via an app.
With over 220 online services, the city of Dortmund already has the largest online portfolio of any municipality, which we want to continue to expand.
We will increasingly implement the principles of “Open Data” and “Open Government” in practice in the future: We will make the city’s Open Data portal user-friendly and expand it into a genuine transparency platform.
At our initiative, a digital interactive budget has already been introduced.
Programme of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on 14 September This includes digital record keeping with largely paperless administration, automation with AI-supported assistants for processing standard requests, cloud solutions for fast, location-independent work and digital workflows, as well as a well-functioning or expanded fiber optic network.
We will continue to rely on the good cooperation with DOKOM21.
Multilingualism on the part of the city is to be expanded: This concerns forms, applications, information and signage.
With these measures, we will relieve employees and significantly simplify their daily work, so that they can deal with the pressing tasks.
Personnel-intensive activities, such as on-site inspections, can be carried out more frequently as a result.
We will use these efficiency gains to counteract the demographic change in the administration.
The workforce can rely on this, because we are committed to good work in the city of Dortmund, which offers people security, good working conditions and a wage in line with collective agreements.
The further development of the administration will only be successful together with the employees and not against them.
For this reason, we will strengthen the attractiveness of the city of Dortmund as the largest employer in the city through We will continue to gradually convert all mini-jobs in the Dortmund municipal authority to employment relationships that are subject to social insurance.
We want to reduce fixed-term contracts and the employment of freelancers to a minimum.
Outsourcing will also be reduced and instead of purchasing external services, we will increasingly provide services ourselves.
We will of course continue to have a large number of trainees and students in the municipal authority.
We want to take more risks.
Municipal authorities in our country must become more agile, faster and more effective.
We want to significantly reduce unnecessary bureaucracy, which we as a city can influence, and streamline and optimize work processes.
The services provided by the Dortmund municipal authority must be even more closely aligned with the living situations of the people in the city and should work as much as possible without applications.
We want to generate proactive administrative services.
This means that in future the municipal authority will independently provide services to citizens without applications and purely on the basis of data, where this makes sense and where legal regulations do not stand in the way.
This will save time and relieve the administration of unnecessary bureaucracy.
In this context, we will follow the statements of the state modernization of the new federal government and create a department for digitalization, personnel service and administrative modernization in the existing department structures.
Simplified and less bureaucratic procurement processes will benefit local craftsmen in particular.
For example, a streamlining reform of the municipal parking space regulations can also contribute to fewer restrictions for construction investors.
In the area of construction site management, we will work together with the city administration on continuous optimization in order to reduce existing disruptions as much as possible and to inform citizens even better.
Another focus here should also be on barrier-free access and safety for pedestrians and cyclists.
Important services such as housing allowance or naturalization should be simplified.
Dortmund will become a smart city.
We will set up a comprehensive digital city map as an interactive map with information on construction sites, free parking spaces, charging stations, etc.
And we will use IoT sensors for better control of waste disposal, street lighting, air quality, traffic, etc.
With a traffic data analysis, we want to contribute to the improvement of public transport and traffic flow.
The public, free and ad-free high-speed WLAN as well as Freifunk in public places and in buildings used by the city must be further expanded.
The city's buses and trains should also become part of the WLAN network and receive a better digital offer.
This includes reliable information on delays and alternatives as well as WLAN at as many stops as possible.
Program of the SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on September 14, 2025 Dortmund can have solid finances and investments in public services Dortmund's city finances are on a solid footing.
Through sound budgetary policy, we have managed to generate surpluses and reduce the stock of liquidity loans in recent years.
We have invested as much as we have not done for decades.
This course must also be continued courageously in economically difficult times.
If consolidation measures are necessary in the future, any task criticism will always be done with a sense of proportion - we are not going to ruin our city!
The investment backlog in NRW municipalities amounts to around 50 billion euros.
Without cities and municipalities that are capable of action and invest in their infrastr The focus of the distribution of the funds from the “Special Infrastructure Fund” in NRW must be on the cities and municipalities.
We therefore call on the state government to pass on at least 80 percent of its share of the special fund to the municipalities.
The municipalities should receive the funds as lump-sum budgets over the entire period, with reporting and proof obligations to be limited to a minimum, as the municipal umbrella organizations rightly demand.
In addition, planning and personnel costs should be eligible for funding, so that the investments can be implemented quickly.
In view of the high municipal investment needs and the possibility of new borrowing by the federal states created by the Basic Law, this distribution does not only seem necessary, but also appropriate.
The actual local needs and the different financial strengths must be taken into account when distributing the funds to the cities and municipalities.
It will be of crucial importance to be able to invest the new financial resources from the “Special Infrastructure Fund” of the federal government quickly and efficiently in Dortmund.
We will provide the necessary resources for this.
In addition, the federal government and the state must implement their promises with regard to the actual assumption of To achieve this, funding should be designed to be effective and uncomplicated, and a digital and transparent funding platform should be created.
Another way to reduce bureaucracy is to simplify the use of funds.
In principle, the funds should be left to the municipalities to use for achieving specific goals, as they are best placed to know how to achieve them effectively.
With the implementation of the property tax reform from 2025, we have decided in Dortmund to allow for differentiated rates of property tax for residential and non-residential properties, in order to avoid placing too much of a burden on tenants and homeowners – or even to provide them with some relief.
We will not use the property tax to “make money from our citizens” and will keep the tax base constant until at least 2030.
The rate of property tax will also remain stable.
Public services that belong to everyone
We see municipal companies as an integral part of municipal self-government, through which significant contributions are made to public services.
We expressly support municipal companies as the backbone of a functioning city and reject the privatisation of goods or services of the public services, because Dortmund is the Co-determination and collective bargaining are absolutely fundamental to us in this regard.
The actions of municipal companies should be markedly different from those of private actors by being guided by the common good.
This is living solidarity!