39The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Trade fair/event location •Maintaining and expanding Dortmund as an attractive congress city and the number 1 trade  fair location in Westphalia •Active support for the implementation of the Westfalenhallen Group's future concept Retail/restaurants/markets As the regional center of Westphalia, the commercial city of Dortmund fulfills many different  functions. Whether retail, culture or sport, Dortmund's attractive location makes it a magnet for  people from the entire region and neighboring countries. Maintaining this attractiveness is therefore  of immense importance for the future development of our city. This principle needs to be taken into  account, especially when it comes to questions of municipal mobility development. As the CDU  Dortmund, we want to further strengthen Dortmund as a location for trade and events. This applies  to both the city center and the city districts. Our political goals are: •Curbing the further growth of retail chains and greater promotion of attractive retail  trade •Targeted promotion of small-scale specialized retail in the city's secondary centers •Strengthening a lively gastronomy scene in the city •Development of the Union Quarter in the Rheinische Strasse area with its  existing pub and restaurant scene into a popular nightlife district •Development of a modern concept for attractive weekly markets in Dortmund •No overbuilding of Hansaplatz with a market hall Healthcare industry/clinic/nursing 4.0 The restructuring of Dortmund Hospital, which we have actively supported politically, has been a  success so far. As a maximum care hospital, the clinic is of great importance for the entire region and,  like all other hospitals in our city, can be sure of our utmost support. The healthcare industry is of enormous importance for Dortmund today. According to the Dortmund  Chamber of Industry and Commerce, around 85,000 employees work in its district. This makes the  healthcare industry the largest employer in the chamber. In addition to medical care, the focus here  is also on nursing, care, medical professions and health insurance. The BioMedizinZentrum Dortmund (BMZ), a center for start-ups in the industry, is based in  Dortmund. The same applies to Boehringer Ingelheim microParts GmbH. There are also pharmacies  and owner-managed family businesses in the medical products market, nutrition and health  consultancies as well as wellness and fitness providers. A distinct growth market.