2The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Prologue The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the CDU Dortmund describes our ideas for the future of our  city. We see Dortmund •as a city where opportunities become reality, •as a city that we can be proud of, •as a city in which we shape the future together. Our convictions are based on around 1,200 years of urban history, in which we have repeatedly  succeeded in winning the future anew. Be it the medieval trading history, the industrial history with  coal, steel and beer or the largely successful structural change to a modern service and technology  location of the 21st century. The omnipresent changes in the cityscape and the numerous prestigious  awards for urban development, sustainability, climate protection, digitalization and innovative  administration are evidence of the successful transformations of the past decades. We are firmly convinced that we will overcome the challenges of the coronavirus pandemic just as  successfully and emerge from this crisis stronger in the end. It is clear to us that the realization of the  future steps outlined in the following chapters also depends on how we as a society succeed in  overcoming the consequences of the corona pandemic in social, financial, economic, family and  cultural terms. This will require joint efforts at all levels of government and by all of us in Dortmund.  With this goal in mind, the CDU Dortmund will continue to be committed to a policy that opens up  financial leeway through sound housekeeping and draws lessons from the corona pandemic in order  to be best prepared for future crisis situations. The discussions about Dortmund's "Tatort" show that the widespread cliché image of our city is  rightly not shared by the people of Dortmund. Because the city of Dortmund has more to offer: •As one of the greenest cities in Europe with 63 percent greenery, •as a city with 10 percent nature and landscape conservation areas and •as one of the largest university locations in Germany with 54,000 students and excellence in  research and teaching. Our home city is home to artificial intelligence, modern logistics, medical and drug research, future  mobility and world market leaders from various sectors. There are also many other outstanding  economic, social and cultural highlights to discover. We in Dortmund can do anything - and at the highest level! Pioneering large-scale projects in the  recent past (such as the Technology Park, the Westfalenhütte site, Phoenix West, the Phoenix Lake,  the Stadtkrone, Hohenbuschei and the Konzerthaus) have brought Dortmund forward and created  new perspectives. With "Smart-Rhino", the Westfalenhallen future concept, the redesign of the  northern area around the railroad station and the "Digital Campus" at Dortmund's port, further  prestigious projects are planned, projected and within realistic reach. Projects that will make  Dortmund an even stronger digital and smart center of the Ruhr metropolis and Westphalia.