11The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Dortmund on the move - mobile.modern.future- proof. Dortmund - located in the heart of North Rhine-Westphalia - is well connected and accessible. This  applies to all modes of transportation. Traffic areas are the lifelines of a modern city. The structural  condition of the traffic areas must be intact. The same applies to the supply systems for electricity,  gas, water, sewage and telecommunications. Dortmund is a shopping city and the cultural center of Westphalia and therefore depends on a  functional infrastructure network. Tens of thousands of employees commute in and out of our city  every day. Mobility continues to be a basic requirement for participation and economic  development. However, our citizens are also entitled to an intact infrastructure, as it is their civic  asset. In view of the fact that mobility is changing in our society, traffic areas and their use must be  regularly reviewed and evaluated. We want to continue to enable citizens to use them individually in  the future. Where possible, we want to design new divisions of traffic areas in such a way that  pedestrians, cyclists and motorists all benefit. In addition, we want to expand public transport as far  as possible so that it is used even more. Our aim is to ensure that Dortmund remains an attractive regional center for trade and culture in the  future. We want to bring living and working closer together again locally in order to relieve traffic  congestion where possible. However, we will regularly work to prevent economic damage and job  losses in our city. For example, significantly improved regional transport concepts must be developed  for commuters, park+ride systems must be expanded on an inter-communal basis, cycle path  networks must be optimized and the local public transport network must be further developed  regionally. Modern digital traffic guidance systems must also be set up at municipal and regional  level in order to make further progress in reducing environmental pollution. We are committed to continuing to pursue the maintenance and repair of traffic areas as a central  political goal. In doing so, we have ecological issues firmly in our sights. We want to give citizens the  space they need for their individual mobility requirements. In doing so, we rely on conviction and  voluntariness. Because every person who changes their mobility behavior out of conviction and  voluntarily convinces the next person to do the same. We reject the idea of massively restricting the  mobility of individual groups for ideological reasons.