45The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU CDU - Dortmund. Shaping the future. Shape. Epilogue Our Dortmund, our city of opportunities, whose future we want to shape together: We discussed, debated, evaluated and "grounded" the opportunities, requirements for action and  development goals within the party, in conversation and discourse with selected experts from urban  society and many Dortmund residents in workshop discussions, forums, events and competence  groups. In terms of ideas and personnel, we are well equipped for the dynamics of change that we will have  to continue to face in Dortmund. More than once, we have already shown together in Dortmund that  we can embrace change and successfully master changes of course, rethinking and developments.  This will continue to be the case in the future. As the party of practical reason, the CDU has stood for innovation in education, business, science and  research for decades. Our social compass is geared towards social justice, with the aim of promoting  and demanding. Our main tasks are to make social coexistence in the city's neighborhoods attractive,  with affordable housing, modern daycare centers and schools, modern mobility and an efficient  infrastructure in retail and cultural facilities. We want to bring work and living together again  wherever possible. We want to preserve what is valuable and tried and tested, while at the same  time thinking and acting in new ways where this seems necessary and appropriate. With many large and numerous smaller ideas, we want to further develop Dortmund with  moderation and focus. Our Dortmund vision: The people of Dortmund should and want to live in a  city that makes many things possible. With an open attitude for further ideas and projects. We know that the development of our city is an ongoing process. Our Dortmund Program 2020 -  2025 aims to be far-sighted, innovative, measured and considerate in presenting various options for  action for coexistence in our urban society, and we are determined to work with you to implement our  Dortmund Program. Out of love for our city - out of love for our home. Therefore, please place your trust in our political and personal offer for Dortmund on  September 13, 2020 with your votes for •Dr. Andreas Hollstein as CDU candidate for the election of the Lord Mayor •The CDU candidates for the city council elections •The CDU candidates for election to the district councils •The CDU candidates in the first direct election to the "Ruhr Parliament" at the  Regionalverband Ruhr (RVR).