Page 1:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the CDU describes our ideas for the future of our city. We are firmly convinced that we will overcome the challenges of the coronavirus pandemic just as  successfully and emerge from this crisis stronger in the end. The discussions about Dortmund's "Tatort" show that the widespread cliché image of the city is  rightly not shared by the people of Dortmund. Because the city of Dortmund has more to offer: •As one of the greenest cities in Europe with 63 percent greenery. •as a city with 10 percent nature and landscape conservation areas.


Page 2:
Dortmund is a multi-colored, aspiring, courageous and cosmopolitan city with committed and down- to-earth citizens who look to the future with confidence. Dortmund is a modern and dynamic metropolis that is shaping the future together through the participatory interaction of urban society. One of Dortmund's strong points is our distinctive and differentiated educational landscape. The future of our city can only be designed and shaped locally. The "Ruhr Conference", launched by the current CDU-led state government, deals with topics such as mobility, transport systems, education, safety, health, environmental and landscape planning.


Page 3:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the CDU will demand, promote and vigorously strengthen the expansion of qualified citizen participation. We want to set a good example in Dortmund when it comes to resources for a good climate, clean air and environmentally friendly transportation - in short: life in the city of the future. Dortmund has already recognized the opportunities presented by the megatopic of digitalization in the past and has been named the "Most Digital City" The radical changes in the world of work as a result of the corona pandemic show just how right this focus was.


Page 4:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU is the election program of the city's new mayor. The program is organized into three thematic blocks: Where we are at home - living environments for Dortmund; 600,000 heads - the Dortmund company; and public services for Dortmund. The CDU will send its strongest forces to the Regional Association of Westphalia-Lippe (LWL), the first directly elected Ruhr Parliament (RVR), the Association Assembly of the Rhine-Ruhr Transport Association (VRR)


Page 5:
Housing, living and working must be brought closer together again in Dortmund. We want our city to create sufficient living space in all market segments to meet the various housing  needs. The criterion of social compatibility is just as decisive for the CDU as the economic orientation of Dortmund as the main center of the Ruhr region and the whole of Westphalia. It is important to take into account the concerns of climate protection to the same  extent as environmental and nature conservation, social security for citizens and the performance of  the business location.


Page 6:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU aims to create sufficient housing supply in all market segments. Construction of 2,500 apartments per year by 2025, with a total of 5,000 new apartments by 2025. Ownership rate to be increased to 30 percent by 2025 and hire-purchase models at municipal housing associations to promote ownership. Launch of a municipal real estate fund that invests in affordable housing as a form of  investment for citizens in times of low interest rates, the CDU says.


Page 7:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Urban development. The program includes the "Smart Rhino" project on the former HSP site. Support for major projects in the Nordstadt district, such as the Borsigplatzquartier/ Stahl- werkstraße/ Westfalenhütte and the port development on Speicherstrausse. The plan also includes the creation of new, attractive residential areas, for example with architecturally valuable "Townhouses"


Page 8:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Environment. The goal is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to zero emissions by 2050. The city also wants to create a "green belt" or "green axis" from north to south through the entire city. The aim is to have 10 percent nature conservation areas on Dortmund city territory. The program also calls for more water in the design of the city and its districts and more green roofs on public transport shelters. It also promises to halve the city administration's CO2 emissions.


Page 9:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. The program aims to promote biodiversity, greening and renewable energy. It also aims to reduce CO2 emissions in the city. The CDU is the largest party in the German parliament, the Bundestag. The party is led by Chancellor Angela Merkel, who is a member of the CDU and the sister party of the Social Democrats (SPD). The party has a majority in the parliament, and is expected to win the next general election.


Page 10:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Dortmund on the move - mobile.modern.future-proof. Dortmund - located in the heart of North Rhine-Westphalia - is well connected and accessible. Traffic areas are the lifelines of a modern city. The structural  condition of the traffic areas must be intact. The same applies to the supply systems for electricity,  gas, water, sewage and telecommunications. Dortmund is a shopping city and the cultural center of Westphalia.


Page 11:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. Our political goals are: PUBLIC TRANSPORT.Strengthening public transport in Dortmund through better services and higher  performance in the existing system. Light rail and bus concept as a basis for further public transport expansion scenarios, taking into account various drive technologies. Decision to expand public transport on the basis of cost-benefit analyses.Extension of the H-Bahn (e.g. multi-storey parking lot, city center, etc.) and/or implementation of cable cars/gondola lifts on suitable routes.


Page 12:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Cycling is aimed at expanding cycling in the city. It includes the creation of a cycle path network throughout the city and the construction of bicycle parking garages. It also aims to improve road safety at junctions to avoid dangerous situations when turning  when turning. The program also includes the development of Bike+Ride facilities and the improvement of traffic lights for cyclists. It is the first program of its kind in Germany and will run until 2025.


Page 13:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Pedestrian. Sidewalk repair program. Barrier-free! Better separation and protection of pedestrian paths. Test track for autonomous driving.Optimization of traffic light circuits towards a "green wave" for 50 km/h. 'Dortmund as the "city of traffic circles" 'Review of tunneling under the B1 and development of possible alternative design concepts. 'Mixed use only if there is no alternative Motorized traffic'


Page 14:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU includes the creation of a digital road condition register and the development of a Municipal Transport Infrastructure Plan 2030. No traffic experiments like the failed conversion of Faßstraße will be carried out. No abandonment of lanes on the embankment Streetscape will be attempted. The city will also invest in sewer construction in the amount of the annual depreciation of 30 million euros per year. Promotion of electromobility will be a key focus of the program.


Page 15:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Parking. Decision on the establishment of residents' parking zones after extensive and broad public participation by residents. Support for the existing airport (operating hours, runway, future concept) Harbor. Promotion of the port as the largest industrial area in Dortmund with around 5,000 jobs. No residential use at the harbor. Construction of the full connection of OWIIIa/ Mallinckrodtstraße to Westfaliastraße. Campus for Digital and Start-ups.


Page 16:
The sports city of Dortmund offers a wide range of activities and a diverse sports infrastructure. Sport  promotes health, is integrative and strengthens togetherness. Just as important for Dortmund are leisure facilities such as the  Revierpark, Rombergpark or Westfalenpark and public gardens such as those in the Mengede district. We will continue to support our clubs  and the many volunteers to the best of our ability. We also want to secure a future for our parks and  leisure facilities.


Page 17:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. Our political goals are to improve the image and sporting infrastructure of our city. We want to support major sporting events (European Football Championships 2024, Olympics  2032, etc.) We also want to promote competitive sports through more intensive networking and coordination of existing facilities and organizations with the involvement of TU  Dortmund University. We also hope to create new modern "fitness trails" for all ages and to encourage movement in school playgrounds.


Page 18:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU includes the revitalization of Rombergpark and the zoo. It also includes the development and implementation of a holistic future concept for Westfalenpark, taking  into account future uses, gastronomic concepts and possible extensions to the Phoenix- West site. There are also plans for the existing parks, green spaces and  leisure facilities in the city districts (e.g. Volksgärten, Fredenbaumpark, etc.)


Page 19:
Dortmund as a city of culture gives expression to this claim. Art and cultural life are elementary attraction, image and quality features of a city. Culture is an important location factor when it comes to attracting jobs in attractive companies. Dortmund is regarded as a center for the cultural and  creative industries as well as for sophisticated artistic and musical offerings for children and young people. The CDU Dortmund is particularly committed to promoting the diversity of  independent culture with a focus on quality and standards. 20The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU.


Page 20:
 CDU: Culture is relaxation, inspiration, creativity, variety, the cultivation of tradition, visitor and tourism magnet. CDU as a people's party, cultural policy is not elitist advocacy for the few. For us, culture means opera, operetta,  ballet, drama, museums, libraries, adult education centers and music schools. Culture shapes the way we live together in our districts and the city as a whole. The Brückstraßenviertel, the creative UnionviERTel with the expanded profile of the "Dortmunder U" and the now completed and renovated "BühnenVIertel" are to become culturally characterized urban districts.


Page 21:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the CDU includes the promotion of the Choir Academy as one of the largest singing schools in Europe. It also includes the development of the "Bühnenviertel am Wall" according  to a holistic building concept (theater, opera house and "Junge Bühne Westfalen") It also promotes the early promotion of cultural education for children and young people through cooperation between schools and cultural institutions. It includes the expansion of digital, fee-based performance formats and presentations of the Dortmund stages.


Page 22:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. Establishment of a general directorship for the "Dortmunder U" at least two quantitatively high-profile exhibitions and events per year. Revision of Dortmund's diverse cultural awards, which, with the exception of the prestigious "Nelly Sachs Prize" are largely unknown even in urban society. Focus on a small number of cultural awards that gain relevance and attract attention in  terms of cultural policy. More recognition, promotion and support for art and culture in the city districts, amateur culture, theater groups, bands, traditional associations and choirs.


Page 23:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the CDU is a program for the development of the city of Dortmund. The program includes new quarters for the city archive and the "Dortmunder Geschichte" house. It also aims to preserve architectural monuments, ground monuments and movable  monuments as cultural treasures. In addition, the program aims to develop festivals and events such as DORTBUNT!, the e- bike festival, the Cityring concerts and the  Pokémon Go Festival.


Page 24:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU    600,000 heads - the Dortmund company. Safety, order and  cleanliness are at the heart of the CDU Dortmund's policy. A zero-tolerance strategy against criminal clans, political extremism and so-called rioting offenses helps to achieve these goals, the party says. The city of Dortmund also benefits from cleanliness and safety in view of  the strong increase in tourism. The condition of the cityscape has an influence on the subjective  feeling of safety, as does the presence of law enforcement officers.


Page 25:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. Our political goals are: Evaluation of data to determine "areas of fear" and "crime hotspots" as a prerequisite for  systematically combating and eliminating them. Deployment of law enforcement officers throughout the city and not just in "problem neighborhoods"Expansion of cooperation between the police and public order office within the framework of the "Regulatory partnerships" and digital networking between the municipal public order administration and the police.


Page 26:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. Citizen participation in regulatory planning. Equipping rescue workers with high-quality protective vests. More litter garbage cans and toilets in public spaces. No tolerance for violence against police, law enforcement agencies, fire and  rescue services. The "SOS app" for notifying the regulatory authorities. Better lighting concepts in the urban area to avoid and eliminate areas of fear. The fight against political extremism and right-wing extremism. The development of a new city hall.


Page 27:
The roots of our social policy lie in Christian social teaching. Help in cases of need and support where the individual's means are not sufficient to cover their own living expenses. Families and family support are key focal points of our policy. Senior citizens, people with disabilities, children and young people deserve special attention. Our excellent healthcare system is also fundamentally important,  as the coronavirus crisis has impressively demonstrated. Ensuring social participation and working towards greater social justice are the overarching goals of the CDU Dortmund.


Page 28:
The CDU has launched the Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. The program aims to improve the city's social services and integration of immigrants. The eastward expansion of the EU has led to an increased influx of EU citizens, particularly from south-eastern Europe. The city must organize the fight against smuggling, exploitative structures, extortionate rents, wage dumping, illegal employment and other accompanying phenomena such as prostitution, crime or overcrowded  apartments in run-down properties.


Page 29:
The reception of refugees in Europe must be resolved in a spirit of  solidarity and coordination. Only a targeted distribution of refugees that is accepted by all European  states guarantees that the enormous challenges on the ground in the member states can be overcome. Our political goals are: •Consistently combating trafficking in human beings. •Continuation and support of the task force set up by various administrations to combat the  crime associated with trafficking in humans. •Municipal right of first refusal for problem properties.


Page 30:
The CDU Dortmund wants to enable senior citizens to participate in social life in a self-determined way into old age. Senior citizens in Dortmund are of course not a homogeneous group, but have different needs. We will take these  needs into account. Our aim is to enable Dortmund's senior citizens  to lead a highly self- determined life in their own private environment. The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Senior citizens is available on the CDU's official website.


Page 31:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU People with disabilities has essential and justified demands on us as a society. Unrestricted  participation in social life in our city and barrier-free urban expansion and redevelopment are core concerns of the CDU Dortmund. Families play a decisive role in shaping the future of our society. We want to make it  easier to reconcile family and career by providing better childcare that puts the child's welfare first. Dortmund should be the first choice for families when deciding where to live in the future.


Page 32:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. Reduced admission costs to municipal leisure facilities. Construction of a barrier-free playground in every city district. Doubling the number of jobs for street workers by 2025. Eliminating housing and homelessness among children and young people. Increased use of digital options for children to combat domestic violence or other assaults (e.g. using an app with an SOS function to contact the relevant institutions in emergency situations) Where the future is created - schools in Dortmund.


Page 33:
The most important resource in our city is the education of our children. Our aim is to ensure that every child, regardless of their background, has the best educational opportunities. We reject an ideologically motivated preference for individual school types. For  us, the well-being of children with and without disabilities is equally important. We want the infrastructure of our educational institutions to provide a healthy and motivating environment in which children enjoy learning and teachers enjoy teaching. The development of media skills is another key issue here.


Page 34:
Dortmund has developed into an economically prosperous metropolis in NRW. This has been achieved in particular thanks to the active economic policy of Dortmund's CDU. We want to create framework conditions for business, research and science that will enable Dortmund to continue its powerful and sustainable development after the current crisis. The existing structure of  Dortmund's economy as a "millipede" provides a strong basis for this. Only with a successful  Dortmund economy that generates prosperity can social issues be better resolved.


Page 35:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU aims to revitalize old and brownfield sites before open space use. Land policy will be improved through a new "special fund for economic land" The city will focus on sustainable added value per square meter of used  space, says the CDU. The city plans to develop the port as an industrial location, Europe's largest canal port and the city's  largest industrial area for prosperity, the party says. The CDU also wants to strengthen regional cooperation in the area of production.


Page 36:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Industry 4.0 includes the development of the harbor district on Speicherstrasse into a campus for digital  and start-ups. Promotion of "HUB structures" as drivers of innovation and as a  networking tool. Data highways instead of vectors. Accelerated expansion of the mobile network and a free WLAN infrastructure. Bundling of all digitalization topics in one hand within the city administration and connection  to a council committee.


Page 37:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU University location/research/science. Further development and expansion of Dortmund as a location for higher education,  research, development and science. Dortmund Technology Center at Weißen Feld. Development of further locations such as the "Wilo-Campus" with its Smart Factory as a  location for Industry 4.0. Further establishment of innovative companies on Phoenix West. Support for the plans for a new special technology area with a focus on "green  technology" on the Hansa coking plant site.


Page 38:
The CDU  Dortmund wants to further strengthen Dortmund as a location for trade and events. The healthcare industry is of enormous importance for Dortmund today. The restructuring of Dortmund Hospital, which we have actively supported politically, has been a success so far. No overbuilding of Hansaplatz with a market hall. The development of the Union Quarter in the Rheinische Strasse area with its  existing pub and restaurant scene into a popular nightlife district. The focus here is also on nursing, care, medical professions and health insurance.


Page 39:
The city of Dortmund will face major challenges in the coming years, particularly in the areas of nursing and care. The situation on the labor market has developed positively in recent years. Dortmund's economic structure with many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) offers good conditions for overcoming the consequences of the corona crisis. Our political goals are to create an attractive climate for companies and employees to tackle the shortage of skilled workers. We want to continue this trend, even if  Dortmund is facing new challenges as a result of the current crisis.


Page 40:
The intact digital infrastructure as well as the digital provision of municipal services is a major locational advantage for Dortmund. Our political goals are to increase the level of digitalization of Dortmund's city administration to one of the best in Germany by 2025. Data protection and data security are non-negotiable. Utilizing the opportunities of open data in municipal administration is also a key goal. The aim is to increase efficiency of the administration and reduce the need for visits to authorities as much as possible. The "Digital building application" pilot project of the state of North Rhine- Westphalia aims to improve efficiency in building permit procedures.


Page 41:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU is the program of the city's new government. It includes the development of 5G networks throughout the city and free public Wi-Fi in municipal buildings and facilities of municipal subsidiaries. The CDU says it will continue to stand for sound finances like no other party in the future and thus open up scope  for shaping positive urban development. The party's political goals are: •Balanced budgets with annual surpluses and debt reduction •Commitment to financial support from the state and federal government to compensate for corona-related burdens.


Page 42:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU. Full reimbursement of refugee and integration costs by the state and federal government. Optimization of the municipal real estate portfolio. Sale or lease of unneeded municipal properties. City administration/City Group - service  provider for the people. The CDU Dortmund values our city administration and the municipal companies as highly efficient  organizations with an excellent customer orientation. Together, they provide a wide range of  services of general interest for all Dortmund citizens.


Page 43:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU aims to make the city administration and municipal companies as attractive, modern and future-proof employers. Our political goals are: •Promoting the citizen-friendliness of the city administration and municipal companies. •Exploiting the opportunities presented by the digitalization of work in municipal  administration and m municipal companies. •Prevention of compulsory redundancies in the city administration and  municipal  companies.


Page 44:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 aims to be far-sighted, innovative, measured and considerate. We want to preserve what is valuable and tried and tested, while at the same time thinking and acting in new ways where this seems necessary and appropriate. With many large and numerous smaller ideas, we want to further develop Dortmund with moderation and focus. Our main tasks are to make social coexistence in the city's neighborhoods attractive, with affordable housing, modern daycare centers and schools, modern mobility and an efficient infrastructure in retail and cultural facilities.


Page 45:
The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Imprint Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Dortmund district association represented by the district chairman Steffen Kanitz. The content of our local election program is a copyrighted work. The CDU permits the transfer of  texts to databases that are intended exclusively for the private use of a user. The adoption and use of the text for other purposes requires the written consent of the party. Picture credits CDU Dortmund S. 1, 6, 9, 12, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 23, 27, 35, 38, 43 Pixabay S. 25, 28, 30, 33, 41, 42.


