29The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU •Sufficient and up-to-date accommodation options for homeless and homeless  people •Permanent establishment of a "hygiene house" for homeless and homeless people at  Leuthardstrasse 1-7 •Expansion of street social work •Establishment of a mentoring program for volunteering under the umbrella of the  Volunteer Agency •Introduction of a "Dortmund Social Directory" with all information on services and contacts  in the social sector as an open data platform and app •Strengthening "part-time" training to qualify single mothers and men •Introduction of a voucher system for "women's night cabs" to improve the mobility behavior  of women at night and to enable a safe journey home to their home address •Establishment of a "Representative for the concerns of lonely people" as a contact  person for the City of Dortmund in the areas of loneliness and social isolation Immigration and integration Dortmund's history was and is characterized by immigration. The rise of the city through the  development of mining and the steel industry in the 20th century would have been unthinkable  without the immigration of people. In the middle of the 20th century, many guest workers came to  us, many of whom have now found their home in Dortmund in the third and fourth generation. Learning German is of fundamental importance for the successful integration of people. We expect  laws, rules and behavior to be accepted and followed. We welcome immigrants who wish to  integrate as a real asset to our colorful urban society. This is all the more true in view of the already  noticeable shortage of skilled workers. The eastward expansion of the EU has led to an increased influx of EU citizens, particularly from  south-eastern Europe. In many cases, this is poverty-related immigration, which poses major  challenges for our city. On the one hand, there are measures to help immigrants - from health care  and initial reception to language courses and integration projects. On the other hand, the city must  organize the fight against smuggling, exploitative structures, extortionate rents, wage dumping,  illegal employment and other accompanying phenomena such as prostitution, crime or overcrowded  apartments in run-down properties. We were deeply moved by the enormous willingness of Dortmund's urban society to help at the  height of the refugee crisis in 2015. Politically, we provided positive support for the city's aid  measures and made our contribution to this enormous effort. Many of the people who fled war and  persecution back then and came to Dortmund still live in our city today. The integration of many  refugees into school, training, work and urban society has worked well. The humanitarian aid that we  provided together as an entire urban society was important and the right thing to do. Dortmund  made an extraordinary contribution nationwide. Often to the limits of its capacity.