3The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Our Dortmund is growing - around 603,000 people currently live in our home city. People who were  recently good hosts at the German Protestant Church Congress, the Annual General Meeting of the  Association of German Cities and the German government's Digital Summit and who will hopefully  soon be able to welcome many guests from all over the world to Dortmund again. For example at •the European Football Championship 2024, •the International Garden Exhibition (IGA 2027), •or the 2032 Olympics in the Ruhr region. Dortmund is a multi-colored, aspiring, courageous and cosmopolitan city with committed and down- to-earth citizens who look to the future with confidence. Dortmund is a modern and dynamic  metropolis that is shaping the future together through the participatory interaction of urban society. One of Dortmund's strong points is our distinctive and differentiated educational landscape.  Excellent work is being done at our schools and universities. It is our primary goal to bind these first- class educated young people to our city in the long term and to open up prospects for their future  here locally. That is why we as the CDU will consistently look ahead, develop and implement forward-looking  policies. We cordially invite you to do the same and join us on this path! The following key points characterize this path for us: •Ongoing change is part of our everyday lives. •Many people are interested in political answers to current and future challenges. •The social discourse must not be left to forces that want a different urban society. •A triad of citizenship, politics and administration should create an environment in which  work, family and a life of every kind are possible in a modern region worth living in. •Protecting the climate and affordable energy for tenants, homeowners and the economy are  two sides of the same coin. •Industrial and commercial manufacturing form the basis of our prosperity. The "Ruhr Conference", launched by the current CDU-led state government, deals with topics such as  mobility, transport systems, education, safety, health, environmental and landscape planning, energy  transition, industry, digitalization and tourism in various forums. The aim: interlinked results should  provide a compass for the positive development of our region. The future of our city can only be designed and shaped locally. Funding programs from Düsseldorf,  Berlin and Brussels can help and support this. However, the necessary ideas will only take effect after  an in-depth dialog with citizens. The involvement of the intelligence, expertise and creativity of  Dortmund's committed citizens is the best basis for a sustainable and broad-based acceptance of  local policy. The CDU Dortmund