34The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU The most important resource in our city is the education of our children. Our aim is to ensure that  every child, regardless of their background, has the best educational opportunities. We are not  engaged in a debate about school structures, but want to improve the quality of education. To this  end, we treat all school types equally. We reject an ideologically motivated preference for individual  school types. Similarly, social background must not be allowed to determine educational success. For  us, the well-being of children with and without disabilities is equally important. The education of our  children is the key to social advancement, protection from unemployment and the greatest possible  participation in our society. We want the infrastructure of our educational institutions to provide a  healthy and motivating environment in which children enjoy learning and teachers enjoy teaching.  The development of media skills is another key issue here. Just like the cultural education of our  children. To avoid repetition, we refer here to our ideas and plans in the "Culture - children - youth  culture" chapter. Our political goals are: •Continuation of school development planning •Supporting the implementation of the school building program for innovative, modern schools •Collection and processing of data on school construction measures for more  transparency for schools and parents •Ideology-free preservation of all existing school types, including special schools •Construction of two new grammar schools to avoid schools that are too large •No expansion or construction of new comprehensive schools at the expense of Hauptschulen or Realschulen •Support for the establishment of further talent schools by the state •Support for the mandatory expansion of open all-day schools (OGS) decided by the federal  and state governments, along with corresponding further development •Setting a common registration date for all schools - bringing forward  registrations for comprehensive schools impairs free choice of school •Schools close to home, if necessary also via agreements with neighboring towns •Increasing safety on the way to school by introducing the "Yellow Feet" concept and  expanding the "That's how it works" concept •Ideas workshop for more safety on the way to school •More safety and cleanliness in school playgrounds •Realization of school gardens •Rapid expansion of digitalization, broadband connections and digital equipment in schools  for modern teaching •Support for the digital pact adopted by the federal and state governments •Better qualification of teachers in the use of digital media •Further financing of school social work from state funds •Intensification of the student exchange program with Dortmund's twin cities