5The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU Education is the key to a successful life. Dortmund as a city of education enables "Lifelong learning" and opens up new horizons for advancement and progression. As an urban  society, we are working together on the future of our educational landscape - with diverse,  decentralized and low-threshold offers for everyone. Every day, new requirements from different areas are formulated for a modern metropolis. These  need to be sorted and implemented. Solid public finances are the basis for this. Far-sighted  budgeting for the benefit of the city has always been in the DNA of the CDU and will continue to  determine our actions in the future. Because: •Dortmund's solid finances make many projects possible. •The investments are high, resulting in a considerable increase in the value of civic assets. •Dortmund needs a balanced budget policy that enables the maintenance of social services on  the one hand, but also provides impetus for the maintenance of dynamic urban development  on the other. This is our program and our idea for a strong Dortmund in the future. Our administration and the companies in the municipal group work very well. They are 360-degree  service providers for everyone who plays a part in the economic, cultural and social success of our  city. We want to carry this mission statement into the new decade and live it. To achieve this goal,  we need a qualified and systematically digitalized city administration and innovative municipal  companies. Especially in the interests of citizens. The ongoing qualification of all employees must be  guaranteed for this. Modern technologies have turned the administration and municipal companies  into "all-round service providers" for us citizens of Dortmund, offering their services regardless of the  days of the week and opening hours. In this way, citizen services are also keeping pace in the digital  age. Uncomplicated accessibility and a high level of citizen friendliness are important because they  promise an image boost for administration, municipal companies and not least for employees. A  success for the digital metropolis of Dortmund! Around 90 suburbs in twelve city districts form a metropolis: Our Dortmund. Our Dortmund does not  stand alone. We want to be a good neighbor to the surrounding communities. As the center of a  dynamic region, we seek good, sustainable exchange with our regional partners. As the CDU, we  therefore send our strongest forces to the Regional Association of Westphalia-Lippe (LWL), the first  directly elected Ruhr Parliament (RVR), the Association Assembly of the Rhine-Ruhr Transport  Association (VRR) and various other regional bodies. Dortmund must and will be well and  competently represented there by the CDU - in terms of personnel and content! Our Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025, our election program, presents our goals in detail in three  thematic blocks: •Where we are at home - living environments for Dortmund. •600,000 heads - the Dortmund company. •So that nothing is missing - public services for Dortmund. We work for Dortmund, today and in the future! We  work for Dortmund, together with you! We live:  Dortmund.shaping.the.future.