4The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU will therefore demand, promote and vigorously strengthen the expansion of qualified citizen  participation. The findings and results obtained in this context form the basis of our political  decisions. Living together in our city of over 600,000 people is diverse, colorful, life-affirming and characterized  by different lifestyles. Many of our families in Dortmund have a history of immigration. It is therefore  important and a matter of course that we as Dortmund's urban society are open, humane and open  to life. We want to promote appropriate language, diversity, respect and tolerance. We want to  create a new Dortmund "we-feeling" through creativity, civic participation and constructive dialog. At the same time, we will ensure that the values of our free, democratic, emancipated and Christian  society and our cultural roots are tolerated and respected. After all, harmonious coexistence in  diversity only works by setting and adhering to rules and respecting other lifestyles. We see this as an  opportunity and enrichment, as a necessary and indispensable orientation, not as a restriction. We want to set a good example in Dortmund when it comes to resources for a good climate, clean air  and environmentally friendly transportation - in short: life in the city of the future. The right suit for  this consists of a sense of proportion, sustainable concepts and the necessary stride. Our Dortmund  should: •technologies, cooperation and innovations for environmental and climate protection. •Encourage participation and personal initiatives in climate protection. •Creating a climate-neutral future with EU, federal and state funding. In the Dortmund metropolitan region, we want to bring mobility and climate protection together. We  want to optimally dovetail individual transportation of any kind, public transport and innovative  mobility services. In the past, we have already initiated attractive projects that rethink mobility. We  will continue to do so in the future with test tracks for autonomous driving and a cycle path network  worthy of the name. What we do not want: The restriction of individual freedom and the  implementation of ideology-driven policies! We Dortmund residents meet at various city and district festivals, in cultural venues, in parks, at  Cityring concerts, at markets, in our sports facilities and at major city events to celebrate this  "together" and fill it with life. The fact that "together" characterizes our Dortmund has been shown  in the management of the refugee crisis and is currently evident in the forward-looking, clear and  consistent approach in the fight against the corona pandemic. Dortmund has already recognized the opportunities presented by the megatopic of digitalization in  the past and has been named the "Most Digital City". The radical changes in the world of work as a  result of the corona pandemic show just how right this focus was. Like the industrial revolution at the  beginning of the 20th century, digitalization is fundamentally changing our workplaces and our  overall living conditions. The foundations have been laid to seize this technological development as  an opportunity. The change opens up prospects for a bright future in which Dortmund •as a dynamic location for forward-looking SMEs, the skilled trades and as a powerful  technological production location, •offers skilled workers secure jobs with good prospects for the future and •creates well-paid work, generates purchasing power and enables investment.