32The Dortmund Program 2020 - 2025 of the  CDU People with disabilities People with disabilities have essential and justified demands on us as a society. Unrestricted  participation in social life in our city and barrier-free urban expansion and redevelopment are core  concerns of the CDU Dortmund. Our political goals are: •Creating complete accessibility in public spaces, public buildings and public  transport •Sensitivity to and realization of accessibility in housing construction, retail, sports facilities,  cultural institutions, schools, daycare centers and other facilities •Support for the transport service for people with disabilities in its new organizational form Children, youth and family Families form the foundation of our society. They are the place where children and parents take  responsibility for each other, where values are lived and social behavior is taught. Families play a  decisive role in shaping the future of our society. Promoting and supporting families, children and  young people to the best of our ability is therefore one of our central tasks. We want to make it  easier to reconcile family and career by providing better childcare that puts the child's welfare first.  We want to create an attractive residential and living environment for all children and young people.  Dortmund should be the first choice for families when deciding where to live in the future. In our  political work, however, we always keep in mind those people whose family structures have been  disrupted or lost. Just like citizens who consciously opt for alternative life models. The protection of  children and young people is always our top priority. Our political goals are: •Construction of 2,500 apartments per year by 2025 •Special housing construction program for young families with the goal of a total of  5,000 new apartments by 2025 •Increase in ownership rate to 30 percent by 2025 •Creation of hire-purchase models at municipal housing associations to promote home  ownership •Continuous expansion of all childcare services •Further development of daycare centers into family centers •Making the opening hours of daycare centers more flexible and aligning them with the  needs of children and their parents •Pilot projects for "24-hour, 7-day open daycare centers" to improve work-life balance for  employees working shifts •Support and promotion of company kindergartens in companies and public authorities •Promoting "practice-integrated training" (PIA) and increasing the attractiveness of  the nursery teacher profession by providing a consistent training allowance