For Climate Neutrality 2035.................................................................................................................................
11 For Socially Fair Climate Protection......................................................................................................................................................
11 For Climate Neutral Modernisation.......................................................................................................................
12 For Sustainable Building............................................................................................................................................
12 For a Climate Resilient Dortmund.................................................................................................................................................................
13 For Affordable and Renewable Energy........................................................................................................
13 For the Expansion of Renewable energy.............................................................................................................
14 For Climate neutral Heat.........................................................................................................................................
14 For Species Protection.........................................................................................................
16 For Trees and Forests...................................................................................................................................................
17 For fresh air.....................................................................................................................................................................
17 For clean waterways..................................................................................................................................................
17 For natural agriculture................................................................................................................................................................................................
18 For waste avoidance................................................................................................................................
....................
18 For effective animal protection......................................................................................................................................
19 For an intact environment – everywhere.........................................................................................................................................................
20 For lively neighbourhoods................................................................................................................................
21 For an attractive city centre................................................................................................................................
...
22 For a fair land policy................................................................................................................................
22 For democratic participation.......................................................................................................................................
23 For a good life in Dortmund.
24 For more living space.
26 For good jobs and fair wages.
27 For promoting young talent.
28 For urban production and Smart Factory.
29 For successful start-ups.
30 For sustainable trade in the city centre.
30 BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN.
2025 Municipal Election Programme 2025 BÝNDNis 90 / Die GrÜnEN.
For good economic cooperation in the Ruhr area.
For a strong scientific community.
34 For a community-oriented commune.
34 For a digital administration.
35 For digital participation.
36 For open-source software..............................................................................................................................................
36 For more buses and trains in Dortmund.
41 For punctual buses...................................................................................................................................................
41 For an expanded tram network.
42 For a night network that Dortmund deserves......................................................................................................
42 For good connections beyond Dortmund.
43 For cycle paths that connect.
44 For safe cycling.
45 For comprehensive bicycle parking facilities.
46 For more space to walk.
47 For the removal of barriers.
49 For Tempo 30.
50 For clean e-mobility.
51 For streets that belong to the people.
52 For carsharing that works.
53 For the end of Dortmund Airport.
55 For work instead of exclusion.
56 For a humane drug policy.
57 For dignity instead of need.
58 For the equality of women.
59 For self-determination in old age.
60 For inclusive living.
61 For successful migration and integration.
62 For voluntary work as the heart of the city.
62 For a hospital landscape that helps everyone.
64 For good care for everyone....................................................................................................................................
64 For a healthy city for all genders.
65 For mental health and the fight against loneliness.
66 For responsible handling of cannabis.
67 For good day care centers.
68 For strong families.
69 For support that works.
70 For good school places for everyone.
71 For inclusion in everyday school life.
BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN Kommunalwahlprogramm 2025.
What makes Dortmund special?
It's not just buildings, streets or plans – it's you, dear people of Dortmund.
The people who keep the city running every day – despite all the major challenges.
You, who drive to work in the morning, raise children, help friends, take care of others, and you, who volunteer, get involved, and want to change things.
We want Dortmund to remain a livable city for everyone, not just for a few.
A Dortmund that thinks about mobility in a new way.
With local public transport that is on time, affordable and well-developed.
With cycle and footpaths that connect, rather than separate.
Dortmund is facing major challenges: the climate crisis, rising rents and economic change.
We are looking ahead: determined, confident and with a clear attitude.
With a clear plan, we want to make Dortmund strong together with the people of this city – socially, ecologically and economically.
No one should be excluded in Dortmund – either by barriers or by high rents.
Climate crisis is no longer a distant threat, it has long since arrived in Dortmund.
We do not see climate protection as just crisis management, but as an opportunity to make our city fairer, greener and more resilient.
De-paving, greening and sponge city concepts not only make Dortmund more resistant to extreme weather, but also make it a more livable city for everyone.
By expanding renewable energy, climate-friendly heat supply and greater citizen participation in energy generation, we ensure that the energy transition is economically and socially successful.
Dortmund's 2025 municipal election programme calls for sustainable construction.
Sustainability includes the reduction of climate-damaging emissions, energy neutrality, resource efficiency, circularity, barrier-free access and the creation of affordable housing.
The obligation for solar installations and green roofs for new buildings has been decided and is supported by the local authorities.
For us, this means that climate-neutral and sustainable construction must be required and promoted.
This should be done in cooperation with the local construction industry.
Dortmund will offer electricity from municipal photovoltaic systems through DEW21 at favourable prices with a social tariff.
It will also finance municipal funding programmes for climate-relevant measures such as solar systems on clubhouses, green spaces, geothermal energy and cargo bikes.
In order to be able to cover the increased demand for energy, energy efficiency in the existing building stock must be further improved.
In the future, rising prices for fossil energy sources will save the wallets of citizens, companies and municipalities.
Energy transition is not only an electricity transition, but at the same time also a mobility and heat transition.
The future electricity supply should no longer be in the hands of just a few large companies.
The citizen and energy cooperatives will be the energy producers of the future and create value in the city.
De-paving, a water-sensitive sponge city and more greening are the city's responses to the climate crisis.
The "green treasure" is designed to enhance small existing green spaces, which contribute to the sponge city.
Dortmund offers optimal conditions for long-distance and local heating networks and a diversified heat generation from production processes in industry, biomass, solar thermal energy, waste water, geothermal energy and more.
In order to reduce the enormous proportion of heat supply in CO2 emissions, we will: Critically evaluate the results of municipal heat planning, transparently present them, bring the result to a concrete implementation plan.
For the energy transition, we need the expansion of renewable energies.
Concentrate open-space solar installations on spoil heaps, brownfield sites, conversion sites or fallow land, as well as along infrastructure axes.
Provide free city roofs to citizen energy cooperatives to build photovoltaic installations.
Inform citizens about the possibilities of balcony power plants.
Implement a pilot project for an energy-independent district that is 100% self-sufficient with renewable energy, has developed power storage and even feeds surplus energy back into the grid.
Dortmund is a green city.
We want to preserve the environment in our city and make Dortmund climate-friendly, species-rich and livable.
We rely on sufficiency to spare resources in all areas: From construction to urban development to trade, we promote alternatives that do not cause any new resource consumption.
We are convinced that we must live in Dortmund in harmony and with respect for nature.
Trees and forests offer many advantages for us and nature.
They bind CO2 and fine dust in the air, strengthen the heat resistance of the city through shade and natural cooling.
Forests in the city also offer far-reaching, positive effects on climate, biodiversity and quality of life.
With the decision of the ecological forestry concept, we have already come a long way.
Now it is time to implement it.
We are fighting against all types of health-damaging and carcinogenic emissions.
We do not understand agricultural land use as an interim solution on the way to residential and commercial development.
The agricultural land in Dortmund has decreased by almost half since 1950.
The remaining land is absolutely essential to preserve for reasons of landscape protection and at the same time is an important part of regional food production and supply.
We will work to maintain the Nature Conservation and Agriculture forum in order to continue working on the strategy for a climate-friendly and climate-resilient agriculture.
We produce more and more waste in Dortmund and thereby waste valuable resources.
It is a claim on the municipal politics to promote a change in thinking.
We want to make the path of waste from consumers to recycling as loss-free as possible.
Make deposit systems for take-away coffee cups mandatory in Dortmund.
We will use the possibilities of contractual nature conservation and bind arable strips as ecologically managed buffer zones in adjacent nature reserves.
we will demand a strengthening of the agricultural circular economy.
Our goal is a Dortmund in which people and animals live in harmony with each other and we prevent animal suffering wherever possible.
We see it as our duty to stand up for defenceless creatures in our society and to be the advocates of the voiceless.
To achieve this, we will: • better finance the animal shelter.
Firework-free zones in the city centre and neighbourhood centres to protect wildlife and birds.
Support for a central New Year's Eve event with light shows or drones to reduce fireworks and thus noise emissions.
Long-term opposition to hunting fairs in Dortmund and short- to medium-termOpposition to the offering of hunting trophies from endangered animal species.
introduction of an animal protection fee of 10 € per ticket to support animal protection projects for endangered animal.
Public spaces bring people together regardless of their background, gender, income and age.
We create public spaces, green spaces close to home and inclusive living spaces for all people.
Dortmund's city center is facing major challenges: economic change with vacancies, visible social inequalities, traffic congestion and the climate crisis require decisive action.
We want to make the city center a space for encounters and increase the quality of stay through more urban greenery, better seating options, children's play areas and event locations.
For an attractive city center, we want to show the strengths of Dortmund and revive neighbourhood structures to achieve the goal of a 15-minute city, with a dense supply structure and jobs.
A fair land policy requires clear priorities: to treat land as a common good and to use it sustainably.
Dortmund should be a city in which the basic living requirement of land is not for profit, but for people.
The city belongs to everyone who lives in it – and that is how urban development should be designed.
Speculation endangers affordable housing and social justice.
We want to ensure that an active municipal land policy paves the way for design options in the public interest – for a socially, ecologically and economically sustainable city.
Transparent processes, low-threshold offers and diverse opportunities for co-determination are the key to building trust and increasing the quality of life in Dortmund for everyone.
The city of Dortmund is characterised by its diversity – and that is precisely its strength.
A good way of living together requires places of encounter and coexistence that are accessible to all people equally and without obstacles.
We want to promote social togetherness and create shared spaces in which all people are welcome.
Our city should be a place where no one is excluded.
Since 2019, the average net cold rent has risen from €7.00 to €8.41 per m², which corresponds to an increase of over 20%.
There is no sign of improvement in the situation.
The vacancy rate was only 1.9% at the end of 2023 and the number of socially subsidised apartments is constantly decreasing.
Dortmund needs a realistic strategy to create more living space.
The best approach is to use existing potential: add storeys to buildings, convert unused office and commercial space into living space, convert attic spaces and convert buildings that have been misused or are standing empty.
More subsidised housing construction through the municipal housing concept with a quota of 30 %.
Buy problem properties from the city and renovate them together with GrünBau or similar institutions.
Dortmund is focusing on regional value creation chains, new urban production forms and climate-neutral development paths.
The city must play an active role in this: promoting, networking and steering – for an economy that creates the future.
Sustainable business methods not only offer ecological advantages, but also open up new opportunities for employment, innovation and regional valuecreation.
For climate protection and economic development must go hand in hand in Dortmund.
Dortmund is to become a pioneer of a modern, future-proof economic region.
Climate protection guidelines for trade, the expansion of the sustainable shopping center plan and the promotion of energy-efficient commercial space are to become the standard in industry.
Emission-free delivery concepts and micro depots will relieve the city, while we will specifically promote the circular economy, sustainable innovations and community-oriented companies.
Good work means fair pay, collective bargaining, co-determination, health protection and equal opportunities.
We must prepare for a future-proof working world that is always based on social values and fair working conditions.
Good work is the central pillar of every society.
The promotion of women in MINT professions is therefore a key task in order to drive forward economic and social change.
Women must be made more visible as leaders and role models and actively encouraged to take up technical professions.
At the same time, we need companies that act do and the Chaos Computer Club, and thereby inspire more women to pursue these professions.
The future of industry lies in sustainable and resource-saving production.
Urban production centers and smart factories offer the potential to promote innovative and sustainable production methods.
We want to awaken interest in innovative professions (for example solar technician, craftsperson with a focus on climate-friendly technology, etc.) By promoting university spin-offs and start-ups, we want to ensure that innovative companies remain in Dortmund and can grow here.
And that is why we will • make administration more efficient and customer-oriented by setting up a one-stop shop for green and businesses, which will enable quick and uncomplicated processing of requests.
We will also promote digital production processes and Industry 4.0 technologies in small and medium-sized enterprises.
Economic development sees itself as an active partner in the development of digital, green and socially responsible companies.
Promote the local economy as a nationwide open source factory, where new open source communities are established and open source products are developed.
Locate logistics in the city center with decentralized distribution centers from which packages from various providers are distributed with low-emission vehicles, thereby reducing traffic and revitalizing retail spaces.
Develop a sustainable commercial concept for the city centre that promotes the use of green energy, recycling and environmentally friendly materials.
An attractive city centre with a diverse, sustainable trade ensures a strong local economy and promotes social and cultural integration.
The aim is to further develop the inner-city trade, create attractive shopping areas and sustainable and future-proof business models.
The Technologiezentrum is commissioned to use its special fund to build a craft and trade yard based on the model of the Munich Craft and Trade Yard and Technology Centre GmbH.
Dortmund must be positioned as an international center for research and innovation.
By promoting international cooperation and improving the quality of life for foreign specialists, we want to establish Dortmund as an attractive location for highly qualified workers and researchers.
link between science, urban society and the economy is crucial to develop new solutions and drive innovation in Dortmund.
Through closer cooperation between research institutions and companies, we want to strengthen the innovative power of the city.
The city should lead by example and set sustainability, transparency and independence as the focus for procurement, software use and infrastructure.
Open source solutions, fair procurement criteria and ecological standards are central instruments.
Only if both are designed for the future and implemented responsibly can Dortmund be a capable, just and modern city for all.
Administrative areas in Dortmund are overloaded, says mayor.
Long waiting times, a growing number of unresolved tasks and slow digital tools are to blame.
We want an administration that is not only better organised, but also approachable, open to learning and innovation.
Processes should be faster, more comprehensible and more user-friendly.
The city of Dortmund is responsible for a community-oriented municipality.
The municipal procurement of goods and services has an impact on many areas.
By 2035, a proportion of around 40% of the current workforce will retire from the city administration.
We see it as our responsibility to strengthen the city as a good and attractive employer and to counteract the shortage of skilled workers.
To this end, we will improve training conditions with more money and favourable trainee accommodation.
City aims to introduce working time accounts so that the compatibility of family and work is improved.
Aim for digital file management in all areas of the administration.
Use potential of digital processes to offer all services in several languages.
Integrate multilingual online assistant for citizens' questions (ChatBot) on city's websites.
Invest more in the resilience and cybersecurity of our IT infrastructure.
We are developing Dortmund into a smart city.
The focus is on a future-proof digital infrastructure, free and equal access to the network for all, and the protection of our privacy and personal data.
This enables free action on the net, innovation and fair competition.
The digitalization of the city administration saves work in the medium term and simplifies and accelerates processes, which optimizes the administrative structures.
Therefore, the digitalization processes that have been started must be continued and further potential.
Digital transformation is a central issue for the future of Dortmund.
IT technologies offer enormous potential for economic and social development.
An open-source economy not only promotes free access to technologies, but also strengthens digital sovereignty and cooperation.
We have already created a position for open source and will create a short-term schedule for the digital infrastructure in for social services, booking systems and reporting of defects.
We will also start an Open Source initiative for Dortmund in order to promote the use of Open Source software and technologies.
We will anchor the principle of gender budgeting in all areas, which states that money spent must benefit both genders equally.
For transparent financial management with the participation of citizens, we will provide citizens with an interactive and more transparent presentation of the budget.
We will continue and expand the use of Green Bonds by the city and its companies as a means of financing climate and environmental protection.
We welcome the long-awaited solution to the old debts of the state government.
Financial resources and an independent budget management are essential to be able to meet the diverse challenges from climate protection to the accommodation of refugees.
We want to make Dortmund a city in which pedestrian traffic, cycling and public local transport offer a good alternative to car traffic.
By reducing travel times, we increase safety in mobility.
Even people who are dependent on a car will benefit from the principle of driving slower and arriving faster.
Our mobility policy will also reduce greenhouse gases, as well as noise and pollution emissions.
Overall, we will achieve a more climate-friendly, healthier and safer mobility.
Buses transport thousands of Dortmunders every day on short and long routes through Dortmund.
For us, it is clear: The bus ride must be comfortable.
The bus company must serve the everyday routes of the people.
And the bus must arrive on time!
Therefore, there is no more traffic jams in our Dortmund.
Fewer cars mean less noise, better air quality and more space in our city.
We will focus the priorities – both in planning and financing – on a well-developed public transport system.
Many stages of expansion are already set out in the VRR local transport plan for 2025 and must be implemented.
We want to support the city of Dortmund in its efforts to expand the network and increase the frequency of services, and to provide planning support.
For tickets that everyone can afford Public transport is only used if it is affordable.
The expansion of Dortmund's Stadtbahn network has come to a standstill since 2008.
This must be changed.
Whoever doesn't come home at night doesn't go out – and that hurts Dortmund's nightlife and nighttime citizens.
Only the connection of all districts beyond the daytime hours is appropriate for a big city.
To achieve this, we will create a functioning and attractive night network.
In the future, more people should be able to use and want to use public transport.
There should be no cuts in services.
Operating costs must be covered in the coming years.
Further expansion of public transport is necessary.
We will direct more DSW21 funds into the operation and expansion ofpublic transport, e.
g.
through savings in the subsidies for the airport.
Revenue from the city's parking garages, street parking spaces and other parking spaces on city or city-owned subsidiary properties will be used to invest in the operation.
Dortmund aims to establish a continuous and safe cycle route for all on the B1 as a city road.
Prioritise cycle traffic consistently on the route of cycle routes, especially at junctions with main traffic routes.
Plan and implement two-way cycle paths on both sides of major main roads.
Designate more cycle streets and cycle zones, here with traffic-calming measures such as modal filters.
We need a seamless cycle network with short, direct routes.
The best cycle path should not be longer than the route by car.
We can only increase the proportion of cycling traffic if a safe infrastructure is guaranteed.
That is why we are focusing on separate cycle lanes on main roads as well as traffic-calming measures in side streets and especially on the Veloroutes.
Cycle paths marked, illuminated and made safer at crossings.
Dortmund aims to achieve European “Vision Zero’ in cycling.
The most important thing in cycling is attractive, physically separate, conflict-free and asphalted infrastructure.
Every Dortmund resident should be able to shape their everyday life with the bicycle.
Our goal for Dortmund: all roads must be safely passable for cycle traffic.
For this we will no longer set up any more joint foot and cycle paths in the interior and reduce and rebuild existing mixed forms of transport.
Especially take a look at school routes in order to create safe cycle paths for pupils.
We are committed to a city in which all people can move around safely and freely – whether on foot, in a wheelchair or with a stroller.
The transportation revolution also means making pedestrian traffic safer and more attractive.
To this end, we will introduce a city-wide barrier-free concept that identifies existing obstacles and provides concrete solutions for PEDESTRIAN TRAFFIC.
In every re-planning and new planning of roads, create wider sidewalks (at least 2.5 m) and enough safe crossing possibilities.
Re-sort parking spaces to make it possible for pedestrians to pass, especially in narrow streets in densely populated residential areas.
Use more physical barriers like bollards or plantings to prevent parking on sidewalks.
No longer accept common foot and bike paths in the urban area.
We will convert the B1 into a city street for all Dortmund residents by diverting through traffic and regional traffic to the A2 and A1.
We will not implement the Nordspange as a continuous truck route beyond the Bornstraße to the Emscherallee and will only implement the eastern section of the Hoesch-Allee as an access road to the Westfalenhütte, if possible, with only two lanes.
We want to invest revenue from parking fees and parking violations in the expansion of public transport and cycling infrastructure.
Parking fees to be raised moderately in the long term, in order to create a stronger incentive for the use of public transport, bicycles or footpaths, especially for short distances.
To build a municipal neighbourhood car park in a suitable, densely populated neighbourhood in the city centre in a pilot project in the near future.
To reduce the number of parking spaces in public space in the immediate vicinity and to develop the redesign of the street space with the participation of the local residents, business.
We would like to strengthen the tried and tested traffic concept “Drive slower, arrive faster’ in Dortmund.
A lower speed leads to increased traffic safety for all, to reduced noise and pollutant emissions, to a lower CO2 emissions, and to fewer accidents.
For these reasons, we will exhaust the possibilities of the city to introduce a 30 km/h speed limit as the maximum speed in the city centre.
We will not support measures in the planning of roads that invite high speeds, such as wide roads, straight “acceleration lanes” and large curves.
Dortmund aims to give parked and driving cars less space in order to create more space for people.
This also mitigates the consequences of the heating of residential areas through more greening and fewer pollutants.
Bikesharing, carsharing and e-scooters are thus part of the transport revolution.
The profitability of the airport can be used to finance the costs.
Lastenrad rental and metropolradRuhr are out of the question.
The operation of Dortmund Airport is neither economically nor socially nor environmentally sensible.
Closing the airport offers the opportunity to return a large area to the city that is ready for ecologically valuable and sustainable development.
We do not support any renovation measures that would result in an increase in the number of passengers.
We fight for a Dortmund that is oriented towards the needs of those who are often overlooked.
For a city that not only speaks of justice, but lives it – in every kindergarten, in every office and in every district.
We stand for a city in which children can grow up free of poverty.
For a healthcare system that leaves no one behind.
For cultural spaces that are open to everyone.
For sports that bring people together.
For schools that can create opportunities.
And for a democracy in which everyone is heard – not just the loudest.
Every third child in Dortmund lives in poverty or is threatened by poverty.
We are fighting for a society in which all people can lead a dignified life.
Social security is a fundamental right and the basis for real participation in social life.
We want to improve opportunities for children, reduce educational inequalities and strengthen support systems.
Poverty in old age, especially among women, must not be a societal norm.
The goal of overcoming homelessness by 2030 decided and an action plan against homelessness initiated.
Strengthening of the street work offers for people in precarious living situations.
Telephone counseling and social prevention included in the municipal election program 2025 BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN DORTMUND.
Green politics is a drug policy based on prevention, concrete help for drug-addicted people, decriminalization and scientific findings.
We are working to mitigate the damage to those affected by providing consumption spaces, drug checking, health care and outreach social work.
Employment means more than just earning a living.
It provides structure, meaning and social participation.
We stand for a labour market policy that puts people at the centre and leaves no one behind.
We will reduce youth unemployment to a minimum.
We will support and expand projects that support young people.
Create offers that cover training costs in case of special needs.
Strengthen outreach social work with more street workers, especially in the districts.
Make emergency sleeping places humane for all and, in particular, end the allocation to purely profit-oriented providers and transfer them to municipal or non-profit providers.
We Greens are committed to preventing homelessness, strengthening social security and helping those affected quickly and without bureaucracy.
Our goal is a city in which no one has to live without a decent home.
We want to pursue this goal in Dortmund as well, in line with the EU’s goal of overcoming homelessness by 2030.
The city of Dortmund has set itself the goal of overcoming homelessness by 2030, based on the goals of the EU and the federal government.
Acute help is important, but it is not enough to sustainably combat homelessness.
Once someone is on the street, they often have great difficulty getting back into a stable life.
Our goal is to prevent homelessness not only in the short term, but structurally.
Dortmund has a responsibility to ensure social justice, participation and protection for people in very different life situations.
This includes women, who are still structurally disadvantaged, as well as refugees, older people, people with disabilities or sex workers.
Dortmund should be a city where equality is not just a promise, but a reality.
We promote support services for vulnerable groups, campaign for fair working conditions, even in marginalised areas of life.
Women still experience structural disadvantages in almost all areas of life.
At least one third of all women living in Germany experience physical, psychological or sexualized violence.
The fact that a femicide occurs almost every day is a social and political scandal.
We want all people in Dortmund to be able to live freely, safely and equally.
In a just society, every person has the right to equal participation – regardless of physical or mental abilities, origin, age or social situation.
In Dortmund, around 120,000 people over the age of 65 live.
Their life experience, knowledge and commitment enrich our coexistence.
We are committed to ensuring that all people can age with dignity and participate actively in social life until a ripe old age.
Strengthen and expand the city's senior citizens' homes and the promotion of intercultural concepts.
Establish more free, public and around-the-clock open toilets.
Finance more full-time positions that are funded by the city and that deal with the concerns of older migrant people in particular.
We stand for a refugee policy that places human rights at the centre and sees integration as an opportunity.
We are guided by the conviction that every person deserves protection and a life in safety and dignity – regardless of their origin or the reason for their flight.
We categorically reject the so-called ‘payment card for refugees’
Sex work and prostitution are social realities that require differentiated political responses.
Our goal is a policy that protects those affected, rather than stigmatizing them.
We advocate an approach that places the rights of sex workers and the self-determination of sex Workers at the center.
We also take a firm stance against human trafficking and forced prostitution.
In Dortmund, thousands of people are voluntarily active in clubs and initiatives to help others and make our city a more pleasant place to live.
This commitment deserves not only our recognition, but also our active support.
For this, we need reliable framework conditions.
Too often, valuable initiatives fail due to bureaucratic hurdles or a lack of resources.
The city must act as
We are proud that the health of the people is our top priority, not what brings in the most money.
We support refugees in their integration into legal structures and offer protection from exploitative working and living conditions.
We are proud to support the Social-Ecological Center (SÖ Municipal Election Program 2025 BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN DORTMUND)
A healthy city needs accessible practices, fair working conditions, safe maternity wards, preventative healthcare services for all age groups and genders.
We want to implement measures that improve everyday life, make structures fairer and see health as a joint task.
Medical services that are accessible and affordable for everyone must not be a privilege.
They must be available to everyone, regardless of where they live, their income, their background, their age or their gender.
The Klinikum Dortmund is a special guarantor for the health of our city as a municipal hospital of maximum care.
The Klinikum Dortmund has invested in the creation of the prevention department for cannabis.
HIV prevention has been strengthened.
The cancer counseling and parental self-help have been established under the municipal election program 2025 BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN DORTMUND.
Even loneliness can affect everyone and has far-reaching health consequences, also through interactions with physical illnesses.
We stand for a healthy city.
This includes the inclusion of mental health in addition to physical health.
All citizens should have access to the advice and treatment they need.
We need more places where people with mental illnesses and their relatives can exchange their experiences.
For mental health and the fight against loneliness we need measures to de-stigmatize and more offers to enable mental health.
We advocate the legalization of cannabis and responsible consumption in accordance with the rules for cigarettes and alcohol.
We see consumption bans in the immediate vicinity of facilities for children, young people and students as important.
We want every child in Dortmund to have access to high-quality care.
We prioritize the construction of childcare facilities, especially next to schools, within the administration and in the planning and implementation of construction.
We support the establishment of cannabis cultivation associations through well-considered site planning.
We place particular value on a non-discriminatory access to all nurseries, regardless of location, origin or religion.
Since 2020, 18 new day care centers have been created and the number of care places has been expanded by around 1,800.
Dortmund should become a city in which all young people can grow up, develop freely and fully exploit their potentials.
Our goal is a day care place for every child who wants one.
Until then, child day care will remain an important and necessary form of care.
We will continue to expand the number of care places for children under and over three years of age, especially in underserved districts.
Financially strengthen care before and after Kita opening hours.
We want to change this and advocate for more child-friendly open spaces.
Lower financial barriers for children and enable free admission to swimming pools or the Westfalenpark.
Establish more traffic-calmed areas and 30 km/h zones in residential areas for more safety.
We want to start a skilled labor offensive.
Family is where responsibility for each other is taken on.
We want to support and value all family forms – single parents with children, patchwork families, same-sex or trans* parents, care communities or the nuclear family.
The mental health of young people is a task for society as a whole.
For an adequate support offer for young people, we will increasingly focus on low-threshold offers for children and young people at the places where they spend time.
Young people have innovative ideas, fresh perspectives and the courage to initiate change.
They deserve our solidarity and our attention when it comes to their issues.
We do not want to shape Dortmund for children and young people, but with them.
In order to promote the participation of as many young people in Dortmund as possible and to make and strengthen their self-efficacy, we will introduce a youth parliament with its own self-managed budget for Dortmund.
We stand for sufficient school places, safe school routes and a stronger connection between school and the wider community.
We are committed to ensuring that every child in Dortmund receives a place at a well-equipped school in the immediate vicinity of their home.
In order to provide children with the best possible school place, we will draw up a comprehensive school building programme.
We advocate the use of modular or system construction methods that are implemented in accordance with all health and environmental standards.
Our schools must be places that impart knowledge, values and future opportunities.
A good school education lays the foundation for a self-determined life and strengthens the future of our city.
We GREENS are committed to an inclusive, modern and sustainable school landscape – with sufficient school places, good equipment and good equipment.
Education must be designed with the needs of children in mind, in order to provide them with fair opportunities.
Schools are more than just places of learning, they are living spaces in which children and young people spend a large part of their time.
A modern infrastructure and healthy food are essential for this.
Inclusion and individual support must not just be buzzwords, but must become a lived reality in everyday school life.
We want a school system that is geared to the needs of the children and not just to this end.
Digitalization is fundamentally changing our society.
We must also use the opportunities of digitalization in our schools.
Our schools are more than just places of learning – they are a place of our democracy.
Here young people learn not only facts, but also how to discuss with one another, find compromises and take responsibility.
We want children and young people to grow up to be competent citizens in the digital world.
SV aims to ensure that all children can come to school safely and independently.
The school route is often the first step for children to become independent.
Many streets in Dortmund are not yet safe enough for our youngest children.
Projects such as ‘So läuft das!’ are part of a modern traffic education.
Dortmund has a 30 km/h speed limit in the vicinity of all schools.
The city wants to open up cultural institutions, offers and events, especially outside the city center.
Culture is a reflection of society.
That is why municipal culture and the framework conditions for the free scene must also continue to develop.
A central part of this is that all people should work under fair conditions and be paid fairly.
Culture is more than just a visit to the theater or an exhibition – it is the heart of our city.
It tells stories, brings people together and makes Dortmund lively.
Culture needs space – and it needs openness.
It should not be a privilege, but accessible to all.
We Greens are committed to making culture visible in Dortmund – in every district, for every generation.
We are committed to a colorful, active and safe nightlife in Dort.
In the future, we want to make Dortmund's nightlife more attractive and more suitable for a big city.
For example, we have already abolished the curfew and introduced the position of night mayor.
The offer of the "Library of Things" expanded.
We Greens are also committed to basic cultural provision, which creates places for encounter, exchange and social participation.
MEP 2025 BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN DORTMUND is the municipal election programme for Dortmund, Germany.
The programme aims to promote the city's libraries, bookshops and cultural institutions.
It also aims to strengthen open-air and neighbourhood culture by expanding regular events in parks all year round.
Dortmund's new mayor wants to improve the city's sports facilities.
He wants to introduce a “sport in the park’ program for all Dortmund residents.
He also wants to create community music programs in the concert hall under the municipal election program 2025 BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN DORTMUND.
V.
further strengthen financial support for cultural offers for Sinti*zze and Rom*nja.
Dortmunders use the parks, for example, to be active and to relax.
We see this as an opportunity to make our city even better, greener and healthier.
The sports infrastructure in our region is in many places dilapidated and no longer meets the requirements of a modern, inclusive society.
For inclusion on the field, sporting activities must be accessible to all people – regardless of physical limitations.
Sport teaches values such as fairness, tolerance and respect.
It also promotes social integration.
In order to meet the responsibility of sport, women's and girls' sport will continue to be actively promoted.
To take responsibility in sport, we will: • support clubs in their work and promote more inclusive projects, for example through municipal contact persons and advice for the establishment of inclusive offers.
We will also: • continue to financially support the StadtSportBund in order to compensate for learning deficits.
Dortmund is a city of diversity, encounter and openness.
We want a city in which everyone has the same opportunities and in which discrimination in all its forms is resolutely combated.
To achieve this, we will: • open up the measures of economic development and actively support start-ups.
We will make antidiscrimination training mandatory for all employees in the authorities.
“Dortmund for all” means arrival, participation, diversity and co-creation.
It is shaped by the people who live, work and engage here – no matter where they come from.
Racism, anti-Semitism, queer-hostility and other forms of discrimination have no place in Dortmund.
Diversity must be understood and promoted as a strength.
We are committed to ensuring that political co-determination is possible for all people in Dortmund, regardless of their origin.
Participation must not only exist in theory, but must be designed to be accessible and barrier-free in practice.
This means that participation formats must become more diverse, the administration and politics must act more openly.
Campaign for municipal voting rights for all migrants, regardless of their background.
Fight at the state and federal level for non-German residents in Dortmund to be allowed to vote.
intensify the counseling for job search and vocational training for immigrants from Southeast Europe and the Western Balkans.
Introduce a municipal program to support immigrants from the Balkans and Southeast Europe.
Take measures to create low-threshold access to integration offers and to make access to funding more efficient.
Offer language and integration promotion especially for EU immigrants without legal entitlement to integration courses.
For a diverse society Diversity must also be visible in city life – in sport, in clubs and in cultural offers.
To promote this diversity and make it more accessible is crucial for an inclusive urban society.
In Dortmund, people should be able to live freely and safely regardless of their sexual identity.
For queer life in Dortmund, there are specific needs for queer seniors, young people and LSBTIQ* people with a migration history, which must be specifically taken into account.
Migrants should be included in politics, administration, companies and associations.
The proportion of migrantised people in politics does not reflect society.
We are fighting for a city in which queer people not only live safely, but can also actively participate and develop.
Municipal Election Programme 2025 BÜNDNIS 90 / DIE GRÜNEN DORTMUND, Dortmund, Germany, May 20-23, 2025.
For more information, visit: www.dortmUND.org.
We will take specific measures to further promote equality, participation and acceptance of LSBTIQ* people in Dortmund.
For this, we need to expand safe spaces, strengthen political structures and specifically support queer organizations.
We want to expand participation formats in order to involve more people.
This also includes people with disabilities, who must be included through barrier-free access and continuous texts.
A lively democracy needs people who want to think along, speak up and help shape things.
Dortmund is a place of diversity, cohesion and togetherness of over 600,000 people.
But still many voices remain unheard.
Young people, people with disabilities, people without academic education and many with an international history are not sufficiently represented in political decisions.
Democracy must not be an exclusive space.
It must be open to everyone, understandable and accessible.
Whether in the neighborhood, at school, at work or in the digital space, there needs to be opportunities for participation and co-decision making.
This is what we stand for in Dortmund.
Democracy promotion programmes should be strengthened and further developed.
Existing contact points for those affected by discrimination, racism and anti-Semitism should be financially supported in the long term.
GIS data (geographic information systems) should be made open for science, civil society and citizens' initiatives.
Schools, youth centres and civil society organisations should work closely with schools to recognise racist incidents early on and to take action, the report says.
The report also calls for the creation of a Children and Youth Parliament.
Many people in Dortmund experience racism, antisemitism and other forms of discrimination every day.
Political education and intercultural exchange are also essential to promote democratic values and strengthen social cohesion.
We are fighting for a city that clearly takes a stand against the right – on the streets, in parliaments and in society as a whole.
We will continue to prevent cooperation with the AfD by demanding that all democratic parties in Dortmund follow our example and clearly distance themselves from their inhumane politics, as their rhetoric fuels hatred and divides society.
Right-wing extremism does not begin with open violence, but rather where people are played off against each other, democratic values are called into question and hatred is used as a political strategy.
Dortmund is a city full of life, full of people, encounters and public spaces.
We want a city in which all people can move around freely, without constraints and at the same time safely.
For this, a police force that is close to the people is necessary, which treats all people fairly and with respect.
We work to ensure that political participation is increased in decisions regarding the fulfillment of tasks.
A city is safe when everyone feels safe in it, regardless of where they come from, how they look or how they live.
This requires a police force that works closely with the public and is transparent.
Protection spaces are needed, as well as trust, accessibility and a clear stance against violence.
Dortmund has already taken important steps in many areas, and now it is time to take the next steps.
Only those who feel safe can feel comfortable!
We achieve this by reducing spaces of fear, increasing the quality of public spaces and low-threshold contact persons and good protection concepts.
Conduct regular external evaluations of police and law enforcement measures in order to systematically identify and combat racism and discrimination.
For awareness among law enforcement agencies.
municipal order service in dealing with vulnerable and discriminated groups and involve interest groups of these groups.
train all employees of the municipal external service in deal with mentally ill people and people in psychological emergency situations.
Dren Blue Light organizations through the support of youth organizations strengthen.
We commit ourselves to protecting employees and volunteers in the rescue services from verbal and physical attacks.
We continue to expand the municipal specialist department "Violence against Rescue and Order Services" initiated by us.
We oppose fencing, for example by reopening the Amiens site.
We will continue to pursue the goal that the emergency services reach the site of an emergency within the protection times set by the Dortmund City Council.
We support the fire department in promoting young people and the youth fire department.
Christoph Neumann | Biostatistician 3.
Britta Gövert | Spatial Planner 4.
Johannes Zedel | Managing Director 5.
Jenny Brunner | Campaigner 6.
Benjamin Beckmann | Auditor
Svenja Noltemeyer | Dipl.-Ing.
Spatial planning 24.
Patrick Aljoscha Maxara | Business Consultant 25.
Patricia Reinsch | Ethnologist 26.
Tim St
Sigrun Katscher | Head of Housekeeping 42.
Axel Kunstmann | Retired High School Teacher 43.
Isabella Knappmann | Pensioner/Diplomat in Education 44.
Jürgen Utecht | IT Technician