The programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 14 September 2025 Preamble: With freedom to new opportunities The Free Democrats in Dortmund stand and fight for the values of liberal democracy - also in local politics.
Individual freedom is the core of our actions.
We stand for a policy that trusts people - rather than mistrusting them.
The best ideas do not come from the offices of the administration, but from the heads of the citizens.
That is why we rely on freedom rather than prescriptions, on self-responsibility rather than domination and on opportunities rather than barriers.
Liberal policy lets people do things.
Every person should have the right to shape their life according to their own ideas, as long as the rights of other people are respected.
Our task as policy makers is not to control, to restrict or to prescribe, but to create opportunities and remove obstacles.
Every person should have the same opportunities, regardless of their origin and gender, to develop their potential and achieve social advancement.
We stand for an open, tolerant society in which different identities and lifestyles are welcome.
Dortmund should be a place that recognizes its diversity as a strength.
A liberal society is based on a strong state governed by the rule of law.
Rules apply equally to everyone.
This also applies to the design of security and order in our city.
Liberal politics create the conditions for this: clear rules, fair opportunities and maximum freedom for personal development.
We defend civil rights, protect privacy and oppose any form of intolerance.
We stand for a new way of thinking in our city.
For a Dortmund that is smaller, freer and more modern.
For a society in which it is not the office, but the people themselves who decide what is possible.
Liberal politics strives for efficiency and innovation in the public sector.
Liberalism works.
Because we trust people more – and prescribe less.
That is what we are fighting for.
Together.
Now.
Part 1 A change in the economy in Dortmund.
For everyone.
For you.
We are taking care of jobs with a future in Dortmund.
As a party of the market economy and economic freedom, we rely on the strength of private companies and the motivation, readiness to perform and ideas of their employees - especially in the middle class, among founders and entrepreneurs, in the trades, industry and the particularly strong service sectors in our city.
Not only Germany, but also Dortmund needs an economic change.
Our companies are suffering from paralysing bureaucracy and a shortage of skilled workers.
The innovation potential of the location must be strengthened and its marketing improved.
We are working on an economic turnaround for Dortmund.
For everyone.
For you.
I.
Bureaucracy reduction We want to turn applicants in the city administration into customers.
We want to make it as easy as possible for companies so that they can focus on developing their products.
Many administrative processes take too long, and the opportunities of digitalisation have not yet been fully exploited.
The city of Dortmund adds to the bureaucracy of the federal government and the state with local rules – especially when it comes to requirements that make construction more difficult or more expensive.
We want to change this.
This means for us: 1.
We want to implement a municipal bureaucracy reduction programme to relieve the economy.
The aim is to streamline and speed up procedures by removing bureaucratic hurdles and increasing the digitalisation of processes.
2.
If the federal government and the state have not set processing times for administrative procedures in their laws, the administrative board should set such processing times.
If these are exceeded, this must be reported immediately to the administrative board, which must then ensure the future adherence to the deadlines through personnel support or better coordination of administrative units.
3.
The mayor and the individual department heads must establish and develop a culture of cooperation with businesses, but also with those who want to build.
Applicants must be seen as customers.
If something does not work, we expect the administration to provide advice on how to proceed.
Offices must respond to inquiries by email within a specified time.
The telephone and personal accessibility of all administrative units must be ensured.
The “shutting down” of individual offices when overloaded must come to an end.
4.
We want to establish a system of business guides as a staff unit at the mayor’s office for administrative procedures that involve multiple administrative units.
Their task is to ensure the smooth, timely and, if possible, parallel processing in the departments involved.
The guides are the only point of contact for businesses (“One-Stop-Shop”), bundle all follow-up questions and clarify different viewpoints within the administration internally.
5.
We want to reduce the requirements in the areas of construction and urban development, where urban regulations increase the costs of construction measures beyond the scope of state and federal laws.
Applications must also be processed more quickly in order not to block the growth plans of companies.
This not only strengthens companies, but also makes it easier to build, expand and renovate homes – for more affordable housing in Dortmund.
II.
Business premises In Dortmund there are offers for start-ups, but there are not enough premises in the city for growing companies.
This means for us: 1.
The business premises strategy must focus on the recycling of vacant land and develop offers for businesses of different sizes and in several parts of Dortmund.
A concentration on a large new building area in the open space is to be avoided.
2.
We will demand that the city administration become more active in the Bund and the Land to obtain funding for the cost-intensive recycling of former industrial areas in the Ruhr area.
3.
Economic development should support growth companies in a targeted manner in the search for space after the start-up phase.
III.
Strengthening and marketing the innovation location Dortmund Dortmund is a major high-tech and knowledge location in Germany.
In the past 30 years, Dortmund has developed from a region characterized mainly by the steel and coal industry into a modern, diverse business location.
However, the visibility and attractiveness of the high-tech and knowledge location Dortmund is now in danger of declining.
The relocation of the company headquarters of ELMOS is a warning sign.
Relevant new settlements have not taken place.
Even within Dortmund, knowledge of the performance capability of the local high-tech companies is low.
This means for us: 1.
Science and technology strengthen Dortmund's image in the world.
Economic development should therefore engage more in the acquisition and organization of appropriate conferences and network formats in order to promote the visibility of the achievements at the location and to bring an international audience to Dortmund.
2.
Economic development should expand the concept of joint stands for Dortmund companies at trade fairs according to demand.
3.
Economic development should offer all information materials and its website in English and, if necessary, in other languages of the countries that are of particular significance for Dortmund's economy.
IV.
International economic development and city diplomas Economic development needs a clear European and global dimension.
Dortmund's companies - especially the small and medium-sized enterprises - must also be supported as best as possible by the city.
It is important not to create double structures for existing support, but to create real added value with the city's own activities.
City partnerships and international project partnerships should be used more for global economic development, but also for a critical human rights dialogue.
The international measures in economic development and the new city partnerships initiated by the FDP with a budget proposal are a start and must be further developed.
1.
The city of Dortmund should expand its engagement in the municipal diplomacy.
This includes the active participation of council members in the Council of Municipalities and Regions of Europe, as well as the use of municipal opportunities to make a contribution to German foreign policy.
In addition to economic issues, this includes the thematization of human rights in the context of city partnerships, for example with regard to LSBTIQ or opposition.
At the same time, we are committed to identifying potential savings for city and council delegation trips.
2.
We want to learn from innovative ideas from the partner cities and work together on concrete projects – for example, on the implementation of sustainable mobility, on projects for climate protection and adaptation, on technology cooperation or on training partnerships for the exchange of trainees and skilled workers.
The city administration should create contacts for Dortmund companies and be a door opener for companies from the partner cities in the German market.
3.
For the existing international city partnerships, the respective synergies and synergies in economic structures, clusters and development prospects should be examined in order to define and implement a strategic starting point for economic cooperation and joint cooperation projects for each city partnership.
4.
If there are no or only few points of contact for internationally relevant clusters of Dortmund's economy in the existing partner cities, the city administration should approach suitable cities and regions with specific project proposals.
This applies in particular to leading regions in the fields of high tech and IT.
V.
Skilled workers  The shortage of skilled workers and labor hinders the development opportunities of Dortmund's economy.
The Free Democrats rely on qualification and the better compatibility of family and work, This means for us: 1.
We need a welcome culture for foreign skilled workers.
This starts with a consistently English-language offer of information and appointment booking on the city's website.
The municipal integration offers must not only focus on refugees with low qualifications, but must also make offers to well-qualified immigrants to get to know our society outside of work.
2.
Culture, technology and tolerance - these are, according to studies, important standard factors to attract skilled workers from outside.
Dortmund is strong in this regard and must remain so.
With the new brand strategy of Dortmund, the foundation has been laid to communicate this to the outside world.
In the coming election period, an effective image campaign must follow, which makes people outside our city want to work and study in Dortmund.
3.
Through good childcare offers, we want to enable women and men to combine work and family, and thus also further increase the employment rate.
We want to strengthen the untapped potential of low-skilled people in receipt of citizens' income through qualification - through offers, through the removal of barriers to employment, but also through insisting on taking up a job.
Part 2 Solid finances.
Good administration.
Solid city group.
Thinking about today and tomorrow.
The Free Democrats stand for solid finances like no other party.
For us, this is a question of sustainability and intergenerational justice.
We have proven in the Bund that we stand by our principles with regard to the debt brake, while others, despite contrary promises, are taking the path of unbridled indebtedness.
It is also the Free Democrats in Dortmund who do not want to go to the maximum of the debt permitted by the state.
We are thinking about the debt burden and the interest burden for the younger generation.
We want the younger generations to still be able to make free political decisions about the design of our city - but only to pay off today's debts.
At the same time, we are focusing on targeted investments and a functioning, digital administration.
Because the citizens should get good services for their money.
I.
Solid financial management After a few prosperous years, Dortmund's finances are back in the black.
Just recently, the treasurer managed to prevent Dortmund from having to hand over its financial freedom to the supervision of the district government.
And that despite comparatively stable tax revenues.
Many of the problems are self-made.
A critical review of the city's financial management is necessary.
This means for us: 1.
The squandering of tax money for leftist pet projects must come to an end.
The project and association funding implemented by the black-green coalition – including a center with An6fa meetings and squatter sing-alongs or the support of irregular migration at taxpayer expense – must be consistently and thoroughly combed through.
In addition, the proper use of public funds must be strictly checked.
2.
Without a reduction in personnel expenditures, the sanitation of the municipal budget will not succeed – its share in total expenditures is too large.
The fact that the municipal workforce continues to expand, by about 20 percent in the last five years alone, must come to an end.
We demand that the city not be allowed to create any new positions in the next few years.
Clear priorities are needed in the administration.
If there are tasks that are to be expanded, then other tasks must be scaled back or eliminated altogether – or the savings potential through digitalization must finally be utilized.
StaD further staff growth is needed in Dortmund at last a real digitalisation offensive - for a lean, efficient and sustainable administration.
3.
The central funding management initiated by the FDP must be implemented in reality, so that all the resources available can be used, especially for major investments in infrastructure.
4.
Funding programmes from the Federal Government and the State should only be used for non-investment expenditure, even if they are really necessary for our city.
Because municipal co-payments are almost always involved, which then add up considerably and become a burden.
5.
We want to reduce the cost of full-time advisors in the city administration, who were employed solely for this purpose.
II.
Municipal taxes and fees Municipal taxes and fees are a standard factor in the national competition.
In addition, they burden the citizens in addition to the taxes of the federal state and the region.
The issue of the Grundsteuer (land tax) was recently discussed controversially in Dortmund.
Even though the city of Dortmund has designed the burden for residential buildings in the Grundsteuer to be revenue neutral, the criticism of the Freien Demokraten (Free Democrats) regarding the design of the Grundsteuer reform by the federal state and the region remains.
This means for us: 1.
We strictly reject an increase in municipal taxes such as the Gewerbesteuer (business tax) and the Grundsteuer (land tax) for the coming election period.
Rather, we want to use all tax reduction possibilities that are financed in a serious manner.
2.
We continue to advocate for the abolition of the Hundesteuer (dog tax), the Beherbergungsabgabe (hotel occupancy tax), the Vergnügungssteuer (amusement tax) on the provision of opportunities for sexual acts (“sex tax”) as well as Sondernutzungsgebühren (special use fees) for outdoor gastronomy.
3.
4.
When calculating municipal fees, such as for waste water and waste, the council must critically question the expenditure of municipal companies, especially for administrative tasks.
Citizens should not pay more than is absolutely necessary.
III.
Municipal Companies The municipal companies make a significant contribution to the provision of services for the people of Dortmund.
Whether public transport, waste disposal, health care or energy networks – the employees in the municipal group of companies do an excellent and significant job in these and other areas.
At the same time, however, municipal companies must not give private businesses unfair competition.
Because the municipal group of companies has a competitive advantage solely through the fact that it is insolvent and is financed under conditions that only the state receives.
This must not be at the expense of jobs in small and medium-sized companies.
That is why we, the Free Democrats, stand for a strict interpretation of the municipal code when it comes to the economic management of the city of Dortmund.
This should only happen if the services can be provided by the state in a significantly better or cheaper way.
And we insist on a solid municipal corporation.
Municipal holdings like the clinic must not become a ticking time bomb for their budget.
Financial scandals like those at DEW and Stadtenergie or corruption like that in the case of the jobs sold off at the EDG must be prevented in future by better control systems.
This means for us: 1.
The annual deficit of the Dortmund Clinic of currently 35 million euros threatens the existence of the largest hospital in our city.
The municipal clinic needs far-reaching structural reforms.
It also needs the will to cooperate with the church hospitals in Dortmund and the clinic in WesValen in order to maintain the services for the patients and their parents, but to offer them centrally at one location in Dortmund.
The dogma of the maximum provider, who does everything, must be reconsidered in this sense.
Otherwise, the hospital will be driven headlong into the wall and in the end the taxpayers will have to pay for the management failures – to the 2.
We want to sell pure financial participations such as RWE in order to finance investments in infrastructure and to reduce the city's debts.
The successful privatisation of STEAG has shown that this can mobilise considerable sums.
3.
We reject an expansion of the service company of the Dortmund municipal utilities beyond security services.
No unfair competition should be made to the crafts.
4.
We will ensure that all loss-making subsidiaries, including the Westfalenhallen, the German Football Museum and the airport, are effectively controlled by the administration and supervisory boards.
The aim must be a balanced budget.
The FDP supports the airport in its current expansion stage.
5.
Compliance rules, internal control systems and the new Public Corporate Governance Code must be lived, enforced and continuously improved in all municipal companies.
We, the Free Democrats, stand in the interests of the affected parties for good working conditions, secure whistleblower protection and a comprehensive diversity management in the municipal corporation.
Municipal companies must be exemplary in this regard.
6.
Municipal companies must not be overburdened with further reporting obligations.
We want to retain the advisory board of the municipal economy as a proven instrument for steering the municipal corporation.
IV.
Efficient and digital administration In the course of digitalisation, processes must first be checked for their usefulness, efficiency and customer orientation.
Only then should the processes that have been checked be digitally mapped.
We prioritise open source software and the use of solutions that have already been successfully tested in other cities.
The wheel does not need to be reinvented in every city.
2.
Digitalisation must be designed without media breaks.
It is not yet a useful digitalisation if the citizen inputs their data digitally so that they can then be processed or printed out as a PDF in the office.
3.
The following must also apply to citizen services: applicants are customers.
Citizen-friendly communication and timely appointment scheduling are an ongoing task.
In order to relieve staff and avoid duplication for citizens, we want to introduce document collection limits wherever possible – this means that the passport can then be collected in the same way as from parcel boxes.
4.
Work is also unequally distributed in the city administration.
While some departments are overloaded, in other places they could manage with fewer staff.
In our opinion, an analysis is needed of how the individual departments would be staffed if the administration were to be restructured.
5.
We want to make Dortmund a pioneer in modern administration – through consistent benchmarking with the best cities.
If a municipality performs better in comparable legal framework conditions, Dortmund processes will be reviewed and improved, with the goal of achieving at least the same level of performance.
Fewer bureaucratic procedures: measurable performance for the people Part 3 Preserve the rule of law.
Enforce rules.
The Free Democrats stand for a capable legal system that protects the freedom of every individual and ensures order through fair rules.
We stand for the protection of the fundamental rights of individuals and want as few rules as possible for citizens.
Freedom needs security - and security needs the consistent enforcement of the law.
We want rules to apply to everyone and to be enforced: against illegal migration, tax fraud, social security fraud, aggressive selling and camping and for more cleanliness and security in our city.
The law-abiding citizens must not be the dummies because others ignore the rules.
The city administration is not always responsible.
Responsibilities between city, state and federal police, customs or state administration must be better coordinated - and where the city of Dortmund is responsible, it must also be fulfilled.
Because only in this way can our city remain a place where freedom, self-responsibility and security belong together.
I.
Strengthening security Even though the overall crime rate in Dortmund is declining, there are worrying developments: Violent crime is increasing again, especially at hotspots such as Dortmund Central Station - one of the most crime-ridden in the whole of Germany.
The number of offences committed by children and young people has also recently increased.
We must resolutely counter this development before it becomes entrenched.
This means for us: 1.
The municipal order service, state police, federal police and the security service of DSW 21 must improve their cooperation and eliminate gaps.
There must be no legal vacuum at the transition of responsibilities.
2.
Video surveillance is for us liberals, in view of the infringement of fundamental rights of bystanders, always only the last resort and only justified if an unavoidable intervention of the security authorities is made possible.
3.
The city of Dortmund must advocate for the federal police that there is a visible and easily accessible police station of the federal police at Dortmund Central Station, as is the case at other locations.
4.
The youth welfare office must be strengthened in order to make violence prevention among young people its task in cooperation with the police and justice and to take consistent measures, especially with criminal children and young people.
Violent incidents involving young people also require a clear and unambiguous response from the state.
5.
Security in Dortmund also includes an effective rescue service and fire protection.
Under pressure from the FDP in the council, the city has now again decided on good demand plans for this.
These must be consistently implemented with the corresponding financial resources in order to ensure effective deployment conditions.
6.
We are committed to a well-staffed and modernly equipped municipal order service.
The victims must be able to show presence, de-escalate conflicts and effectively ensure order in the city area.
II.
Improving order and cleanliness.
Our city - especially our city center - must be a place where people feel comfortable: as customers of retail, as guests of the catering industry or as visitors from outside.
Cleanliness and order are the indispensable basis for this.
However, the current situation is off-putting - it is neither inviting nor acceptable and must not remain like this.
This means for us: 1.
The ban on storage and aggressive dealing must be consistently enforced, particularly in the pedestrian zone, in front of the main train station and the associated connecting paths.
This requires a permanent and regular patrol by the municipal order service until late in the evening.
Appropriate personnel priorities must be set for this.
In return, sufficient low-threshold overnight accommodation, washing and toilet facilities must be offered to the homeless in the city centre.
2.
We support the concept of drug consumption rooms, but we continue to reject them within the Wallring or in the unavoidable vicinity of schools.
The use of the Dortmund drug consumption room should be restricted to Dortmund again, so that the neighbouring towns do not have to reduce their offers.
3.
The daily intensive cleaning in the city centre must continue.
Waste containers in the pedestrian zone must be emptied underground if necessary.
4.
We are against blanket alcohol bans in public spaces.
Exceptions may only be made temporarily in hotspots.
III.
Preventing social benefit abuse, making irregular migration more difficult The Dortmund scandal about fake paternity claims at the expense of the state coffers has once again made it clear that the administration must function so that the hard-earned taxes of citizens do not end up in the pockets of fraudsters.
Therefore, control mechanisms must be improved.
We also consider it a serious mistake for a left-wing majority in the Dortmund City Council not to introduce the national payment card for asylum seekers in Dortmund.
This means for us: 1.
We will bring a new resolution on the payment card for services under the Asylum Seekers Benefits Act to the next council meeting.
The payment card prevents the payment of smugglers with cash and the transfer of social benefits abroad.
This reduces incentives for irregular migration to Germany.
2.
With regard to the processing of paternity acknowledgements, the city administration must evaluate whether the legal and organisational changes that have been made are sufficient to exclude false paternity acknowledgements for the purpose of obtaining residence permits and social benefits.
3.
In order to exclude the receipt of social benefits for children who are not even present in Germany, a concept for regular information exchange between the school office, youth office, job centre and the migration office must be developed.
In the case of foreign benefit recipients, it is particularly important to check whether registered pupils are fulfilling their school obligations and to provide appropriate contact points for teachers.
IV.
Consistently implementing the termination of residence: The Free Democrats stand for the individual right to asylum and for the international obligations to accept people who are fleeing war and civil war.
However, we are resolutely against the abuse of the refugee status in order to immigrate into the social system.
Anyone who has no right to be in Germany must also be deported quickly and consistently.
This also applies to poverty migration from EU states, for which there is no basis in the EU treaties.
This means for us: 1.
The municipal staff for termination of residence and EU freedom of movement checks must be significantly increased.
Here, positions must be reassigned accordingly.
2.
Priority in the termination of residence must be given to those who are not entitled to stay, who have unresolved identities or missing papers, in addition to offenders and criminals.
Even if this is more work-intensive for the administration, the deportation of those who cheekily deceive the German state must be given absolute priority.
3.
EU citizens who migrate in order to receive social benefits have no right to reside in Germany according to the EU freedom of movement regulations.
They must lose their unfair social benefits and be consistently, possibly in the final instance in the form of a personal visit to their place of residence or work, urged to leave the country.
The law enforcement and social welfare authorities must work together intensively.
All municipal projects that still promote such immigration into the social systems must be ended.
Part 4 Opportunities in a diverse city.
We Freie Demokraten stand for opportunities regardless of social background.
Especially for children and young people, the education opportunities locally are decisive.
We Freie Demokraten want education opportunities not to depend on where someone comes from, but where the person wants to go.
Everywhere there are hidden talents that deserve good support.
As liberals, we stand for self-determination and acceptance, regardless of gender, race, sexual orientation and gender identity, age and religion, with and without disabilities.
We want an open and diverse society.
We are against discrimination, exclusion and extremism.
I.
Good schools   School buildings, their equipment and school development planning are the responsibility of the city.
This is the basis for all students to receive a school offer that is appropriate to their abilities and that the learning environment is suitable.
We rely on a diverse school landscape with different school forms - whether private or state-run - with the highest possible permeability.
Our school offer is diverse and should remain so.
We welcome the talent schools of the state introduced by FDP education ministers and the Startchancen program of the federal government.
This means for us: 1.
We will ensure that demand-oriented offers are available for all types of schools, so that every child can find the best possible way to receive good individual support and to develop their own potential.
This explicitly includes the strengthening of grammar schools and the preservation of special needs schools.
2.
We want to consistently drive forward the construction, renovation and modernisation of school buildings.
Because learning is better in well-maintained buildings with good equipment.
Intact and clean toilets must finally become the standard in schools.
In order to achieve this more quickly, we support the withdrawal of decisions by the council that hinder construction and make it more expensive.
We also want to implement the legal standards for construction projects one-to-one.
3.
We want digital janitors for the schools.
The technical equipment needs a lot of maintenance and system management, which the teaching staff cannot manage in addition to their other duties.
We need technically skilled specialist staff who are at least on site for a few days.
A central pool of employees that only needs to be called for is not enough.
4.
We support school social work and are committed to better networking the youth support services with school social work.
II.
Good childcare Education starts with the very youngest.
They need a safe environment, security and an introduction to language skills.
A good command of the German language lays the foundation for success and life in Germany and here in Dortmund.
Diversity in childcare is also educational diversity.
That is why we are expanding early childhood education and are thus creating learning and play environments for our youngest children.
This means for us: 1.
Dortmund must finally take the requirements of the Children's Education Act seriously, which demands diversity in providers.
It is too difficult for free non-profit and private providers in Dortmund.
We are focusing in the council on parent initiatives, on free non-profit and private providers - also to make more company-run daycare centres possible.
2.
The "Owls and Larches" concept for opening daycare centres in outlying areas must be further developed in line with demand, in order to reflect the needs of parents working shifts.
3.
We are against the fact that parental contributions in Dortmund are always increasing in the income groups that parents reach when both are qualified to work.
This is especially true for the women in leading positions.
4.
We demand that the city should now waive parental contributions for times when it does not offer services, for example, because the company is on strike or because childcare centers are closed due to a lack of staff.
No service, no money, this principle must also apply to childcare.
III.
Youth work  Young people should be encouraged to contribute their ideas, wishes and fears and help shape our city.
A good youth policy can only be one that engages in dialogue with young people.
Youth policy must, however, offer young people a space - physically and socially.
This means for us: The city should also invest in youth social work in the future and provide space for active youth associations and facilities.
2.
Existing contact points for young people also require the support of the city of Dortmund in the future.
In particular, access to addiction prevention, offers for victims of bullying and low-threshold sexual advice is of particular importance.
3.
We Free Democrats are not satisfied with the concept for youth participation in Dortmund.
In addition to meaningful participation formats that the council has decided on, we are sticking to our demand to establish a youth parliament with the right to submit motions to the city council, similar to the senior citizens' council.
IV.
Diversity in the city - Equality for women, acceptance of diversity and "thinking along" with minorities in politics does not happen by itself.
Here, political will and political support are needed.
Because it is about questions of freedom and self-determination.
As liberals, we stand for this and always have the individual in mind.
This means for us: 1.
We want to open doors for committed women for new tasks - that is why we want a targeted development of the potential of women in the city administration, but also the promotion of women entrepreneurs through economic development.
The same must apply to men who go into professions in which they are underrepresented.
2.
The Free Democrats are committed to equal participation of women in boards and in middle management of municipal companies.
We support flexible targets, but no fixed quotas.
3.
Diversity management in the world of work is more than just promoting women.
We need to think holistically in the city administration and municipal companies, that is, with all dimensions of diversity.
That is why the entire staff in this area should be brought under an organizational umbrella of the mayor.
This will lead to better results and save costs.
4.
Our special focus is on the professional rehabilitation and inclusion in the first labor market of people with existing or threatened disabilities.
We want to support this path of participation as much as possible on the part of the city and the job center.
5.
We will continue to support the queer community.
This includes, in particular, the promotion of the coordination work of SLADO, the school education project SCHLAU, the youth center Sunrise and the health project “pudelwohl”.
We want to implement the LSBTIQ action plan that was decided with our support.
The urban coordination office should continue to be located in the mayor's office.
6.
We welcome the measures that the city and the police have taken to combat right-wing extremism in our city.
But prevention activities must address all forms of political extremism, because we reject any form of extremism that threatens the open society in Dortmund - whether it is right-wing extremism, left-wing extremism or religious fanaticism.
7.
Language in administration must be understandable and correct.
Special characters that do not correspond to German spelling are rejected.
Instead, all genders should be addressed in a respectful manner using appropriate wording.
V.
Health and Social Affairs.
The city of Dortmund offers a comprehensive range of social services through its administration or subsidized projects, especially for disadvantaged people.
We support this.
At the same time, we are careful to ensure that these services are efficient in terms of achieving goals and using resources, and that the social industry does not expand at the expense of taxpayers.
In the area of health, it is clear that the excellent work of general practitioners and doctors is crucial.
Urban services must always be designed as a supplement to their work, not as a replacement.
This means for us: 1.
The principle of demand and support has proven to be effective for long-term unemployed people.
It must be ensured that the job center has sufficient staff for support.
The existing options for retraining and further qualification must be used.
Sanction options should be exhausted within the framework of the guidelines of the Federal Constitutional Court if benefit recipients do not fulfill their obligations.
2.
For all social services, we are of the opinion that services provided by the city should not displace private providers or unreasonably disadvantage them in the competition for the best solutions.
If, for example, the Dortmund city hospital offers special integrated care models, these should not only be open to city service providers.
3.
Contact points for people affected by domestic violence, women's advice centers, women's shelters and initiatives for perpetrator work for prevention deserve secure support from the city.
Secure funding is also needed for projects for sex workers and the homeless.
4.
We are committed to the best possible personnel and material equipment of the public health service (ÖGD) in order to manage the various tasks such as school entry examinations, infection protection and hygiene.
Suitable software products should be used for the tasks of the ÖGD, which can easily transmit health data via standard interfaces.
Routing possibilities should be digitized as much as possible.
We would like to use the possibilities of artificial intelligence for the early detection of critical developments, ideally in cooperation with surrounding ÖGD facilities.
5.
Legal abortions must be possible in Dortmund.
There are hardly any practices that carry out abortions.
Therefore, it must be examined whether an additional offer from the Dortmund Clinic is necessary.
Part 5.
Making our city even more livable.
Life is not just about work.
A wide range of leisure and cultural activities, good housing, a beautiful environment in our city and functioning mobility – these are important building blocks for quality of life.
We want to make Dortmund even more livable and in doing so, we want to take into account the variety of individual needs.
I.
Culture, Sport and Leisure Dortmund has a wide range of cultural offerings: from opera and ballet to spoken theater and concert halls to the free cultural scene.
They contribute to making our city so livable and lovable.
Culture and creative industries are a key factor for the economy as a whole.
Dortmund is a sports city.
The top-level sport from BVB to the performance centers for athletics, rowing and gymnastics is a real key factor for the city.
A lively city needs a strong pub scene, good gastronomy and alternative clubs.
It is a private task to design this, but the city must also enable this and create good framework conditions.
This means for us: 1.
We Freie Demokraten want to further promote creativity and culture in our city – especially when it is created outside established institutions.
We want to maintain the public cultural offerings at a high level and at the same time give a strong weight to the free culture.
It must be supported in the long term.
In addition, we want to create space for modern forms of expression, youth culture and the culture of and for minorities.
2.
The Dortmund museums need better marketing.
In addition to the city museums, the football museum, the architecture archive, the DASA and the industrial museum Zeche Zollern must be marketed as a major attraction for tourism in Dortmund.
3.
A lively city needs a lively club culture and pub scene.
We Freie Demokraten stand for a city development policy that explicitly wants space for parties and clubs and thinks along with them.
Outdoor catering should be made possible wherever possible.
Restaurants and pubs should be given the opportunity to set up fixed patio installations on sidewalks in certain areas – for more atmosphere, more quality of stay and a real scene point.
We want to promote the Dortmund Guides project in order to prevent conflicts and disturbances of the peace in nightlife.
4.
Amateur sport has a significant function for health, leisure time and integration.
Commercial offers such as fitness studios and e-sport are part of this.
We, the Free Democrats, therefore support the sports clubs in the city and want to secure good framework conditions for them.
Sports facilities are to be further developed in line with demand, as is swimming lessons for children.
By securing teaching swimming areas, we want to meet the training obligation.
5.
We support the city's commitment to be a location for top-level sport, to bring major tournaments to Dortmund and to integrate this into the city's marketing.
II.
Housing construction and urban development.
Affordable housing is only possible in a growing city if new homes are built.
The Dortmunder Stadtentwicklungsgesellschaft, which the mayor announced as the key to this, has so far not made any significant contribution.
Once again, it shows that the impetus for new construction must come primarily from private individuals.
This also includes cooperative housing construction companies as important providers.
In urban development, Dortmund must focus on the use of former industrial sites that have been left vacant and the elimination of long-standing eyesores such as the Kronen-Turm.
We are open to modern architecture and also to building upwards.
This means for us: 1.
Private investments in housing construction must be promoted through quick planning and fast building permits.
Personnel priorities within the city administration must be set here.
All options for digitization must be implemented.
2.
The conversion of attics and the extension of buildings can contribute to the creation of new living space.
All building-hindering and building-increasing requirements of the city, such as the compulsory greening of roofs, must be abolished.
The building requirements of the federal government and the state are sufficient.
The city should set financial incentives instead of compulsion.
3.
We are in favor of prioritizing the densification of existing areas for the creation of new living space.
Open spaces should only be developed if this is absolutely necessary for the creation of new living space or additional jobs.
New building areas should be prioritized where infrastructure is already available.
The following is particularly important to us: affordable housing must be given priority.
4.
In the demographic change, we need more barrier-free living space for the elderly and barrier-free living space for people with disabilities.
Not only in housing construction and building renovation, but also in this area, public and cooperative housing companies must take action.
5.
Urban projects such as the buildings for the International Garden Exhibition (IGA) have run out of control financially - as is so often the case with public buildings.
This cannot continue.
Cost-increasing replanning by the city administration should no longer be accepted by the council.
And cost increases must also be contractually limited in advance with construction companies.
6.
We need special efforts for the city center to make the city the "living room of Dortmund".
More urban greening, aesthetic urban furniture and arrangements for the summer are just as important as the renovation of the paving in the pedestrian zone.
The endless story of Kampstraße must be brought to a conclusion.
In the face of the crisis in the stationary trade, we are relying on more gastronomy and events as well as living in the city.
In order to avoid conflicts of use, for example with regard to noise, a quarter-specific approach with special usage profiles within the city is sensible.
We want to specifically promote an area in the city center that serves as a lively center of nightlife.
III.
Public transport: Our city is growing, the mobility requirements are increasing and at the same time we must contribute to climate protection.
We Freie Demokraten want to achieve an effective transportation revolution towards good and climate-friendly mobility.
The basis for this is a qualitatively good and reliable public transport system.
However, the truth is also that the expansion of public transport, for example through a densification of the city rail system, is not only expensive in terms of the rail infrastructure, the purchase of new vehicles and the construction of new depots.
It also meets a shortage of bus and city rail drivers, as many employees will reach retirement age in the coming years.
This means for us: 
1.
The city of Dortmund must insist that the performance agreements, especially with regard to pun 2.
The recruitment of drivers is a priority for the stability of the transport system.
DSW21 should also regularly check and test the dynamic technical development of autonomous buses.
3.
We support the efforts of DSW21 to invest in the existing infrastructure in order to keep the Stadtbahn and the depots up to date with the latest technology.
Further investment potential through the sale of municipal holdings or new federal funds must then be used to expand the offer.
4.
The Stadtbahn expansion program should be discussed and adopted by the council shortly after the municipal elections on the basis of the still outstanding checks.
5.
The connection of the H-Bahn to the U42, which is currently in the planning stage, must be implemented in the next electoral period.
In general, we want to further expand the network of the H-Bahn as an autonomously driving transportation model.
Expansion stages must meet the standard cost/benefit criteria for funding from federal funds.
6.
We continue to support a ride sharing offer, i.e.
a modern, digital version of the call taxi.
We see transportation potential here, especially for the outer districts beyond the end stations of the city rail system – especially for young people who cannot afford a classic taxi.
7.
The public transport connection to the airport is not suitable for the entire city.
The eastern inner city and the district of Brackel should be connected to the airport at a reasonable cost by a new bus line from the U43 in Brackel.
8.
We welcome the launch of the new ring bus line and advocate a second ring bus line further outside to connect suburbs with each other without detours via the city center.
We also advocate the creation of further express bus lines to the surrounding municipalities.
9.
We demand the introduction of automatic passenger counting systems in all trams and buses.
This technology provides precise and consistent data on vehicle occupancy – without additional personnel costs.
This allows timetables and capacities to be controlled in a targeted manner, overloading to be avoided and public transport planning to be made more efficient.
IV.
Road traffic.
The car is still an equal partner in mobility in our city.
Not all mobility needs can be met with bus or bicycle.
In the course of the electrification of the car fleet, climate protection considerations are also becoming increasingly important.
Therefore, we stand for the freedom of choice of citizens and for the sensible linking of modes of transport in our city.
We reject an ideological anti-car policy.
This means for us: 1.
The road network must be well maintained and safe.
The backlog of renovation work must finally be tackled.
Potholes must be repaired quickly.
2.
Dedicated positions have been created in the city administration for construction site management.
Unfortunately, citizens notice little of this.
Construction sites are still uncoordinated, recurring or without visible progress for weeks.
That is why the city administration must place a new focus here.
3.
We reject a nearly comprehensive 30 km/h speed limit in the city.
A speed limit must be limited to danger points.
30 km/h speed limit for noise protection must not become a cheap solution for the rule.
In this sense, existing speed limits must also be questioned and, if necessary, abolished, for example, on Märkische Straße.
In addition, the city should invest in low-noise asphalt wherever this is useful for noise reduction.
4.
We support the expansion of Park&Ride offers.
However, the city center must remain accessible by car.
5.
Parking must also remain possible for residents of the inner city districts.
If parking spaces are lost due to the expansion of bike paths, the city should plan alternatives, for example, in the form of parking garages.
No parking spaces should be destroyed in total for the expansion of bike paths.
In addition, the city should enter into discussions with supermarket operators to see if parking spaces can be used by residents for a fair fee outside of opening hours.
6.
The charging infrastructure for electric vehicles in public spaces must be further expanded in dialogue between the city and energy suppliers.
We are working to strengthen the gastronomy industry by introducing free parking in the evenings in city car parks.
We also support a trial project to introduce free parking for a maximum of three hours at the weekend to strengthen trade in the city and in the district centres.
V.
Pedestrian zones and cycling  We, the Free Democrats, want to give pedestrian zones in Dortmund a higher priority.
This includes resolving conflicts between pedestrians and cyclists.
At the same time, we want to ensure that pavements and cycle paths are in good and safe condition.
Maintenance must be given priority over new construction.
The expansion of the cycle network should be based on actual demand.
This means for us: 1.
Dortmund needs an independent pedestrian officer in the administration who is not identical to the cycling officer.
In the current structure, cycling dominates in the administration.
This reform must be cost-neutral.
2.
All traffic light switches must be reviewed in favour of pedestrians - in a first step in the inner city districts.
This particularly concerns the access to the city's tram stations.
All renewed traffic lights must be equipped with a timer that indicates when the next green phase is coming.
3.
Intersections of cycle paths and pedestrian crossings must be made safer for pedestrians.
Among other things, the red marking of the cycle path should be interrupted, so that cyclists are signalled to take the necessary precautions and that the priority of pedestrians is signalled.
4.
For cycle paths, the quality improvement of cycle paths in the entire city should be more important than lighting projects in the city.
We need a safe cycling infrastructure throughout the city.
We are committed to withdrawing the decision to build the cycle wall.
Even the expensive cycle path on the Ostwall is hardly used.
Existing space can be used more efficiently for the expansion of cycle paths.
5.
The Order Office should consistently punish the blocking of pedestrian paths by rental scooters.
In addition, we speak out in favor of a moderate increase in the special use fees for the rental of e-scooters.
VI.
Private Initiatives in urban planning support We Free Democrats appreciate civic engagement and private initiatives.
The FDP trusts the citizens to do something, but they want to control them.
We want to involve the citizens more in the design of their city of Dortmund than they are now - we want to give them more opportunities to get involved in their immediate surroundings and reward them for their commitment instead of punishing them.
This means for us: 1.
We support the free allocation of small areas of the city to residents in order to beautify their own street, replace overgrown weed strips with flowers or take on the sponsorship of watering trees in the height of summer.
This approach leads to a stronger identification with the residential area.
Feeling involved, included and therefore responsible for any problems leads to less litter and more greenery.
2.
We support the idea from other cities of putting the care of green spaces in the streets into the hands of private gardening companies in exchange for advertising opportunities.
The same would be possible for handicraft businesses with benches.
3.
We do not see “squatters management” as a purely urban matter.
We want the citizens and the local business owners to be able to participate and express their wishes.
4.
Our society is constantly changing.
Whether it is urban gardening, selling homemade products on the street or pop-up street art – all of these are examples of new forms of citizen participation in their own living environment.
What they all have in common is that citizens want to do something, they want to create something with limited resources.
Any necessary permits should be issued without bureaucracy – with an attitude that wants to make new things possible and not to prevent them.