Election program for Dortmund 3.
The future is being decided here.
In September you have the opportunity to vote for a political change in Dortmund city politics towards a GREEN policy.
We GREENs stand for: better traffic policy with a balance of interests between road users, solidarity with one another and educational justice with opportunities for children and young people.
GREEN IS...
Consistent climate and environmental protection!
7 How we want to become a climate-neutral and ecological city.
A 1.
Traffic revolution with speed (mobility)  7 A1.
More road traffic in the city 7 A 1,2 Clean driving  8 A1,3 Better walking through the city  9 A1 1,4 Good offer in Animal protection 20 GREEN is...
Diversity and participation for all!
Dortmund aims to be a city of tomorrow with good education, sustainable economy and a capable administration.
The proportion of cycling is only 10 percent.
In the future, cycling should play a priority role in urban and transport planning, in order to encourage more car drivers in the city area to switch to cycling.
The city wants to be an attractive employer for companies and workers.
A green wave for cyclists promotes cycling and makes it safer.
An attractive crossing of the city for cycling is to be established in both east-west and north-south directions.
The car-centered traffic policy is a relic of the past.
The road space must be redistributed and the necessary space given to pedestrians, cyclists and public transport.
Our goal is: Less car traffic in the city – more space for people.
The construction of the RS 1 cycle highway should be speeded up.
More bicycle parking garages and areas with charging stations for the safe parking of e-bikes and cargo bikes.
Service stations for cyclists with bicycle tools and air.
Bike and car sharing should also be taken into account in the context of concept awards in housing construction.
We want to create city-wide and regionally networked sharing offers for bicycles.
Dortmund aims to reduce car traffic by promoting environmentally friendly modes of transport.
At 30 km/h, fewer and less serious accidents occur than at 50km/h.
We want to push ahead with measures to prevent racing in Dortmund.
We will invest 30 € per inhabitant annually in the long term, as successful Dutch cities and Copenhagen have shown.
At our request, the construction of 12 mobility stations with charging stations was decided in 2019.
The city of Dortmund has been a member of the Association of Cyclist- and Pedestrian-Friendly Towns and Municipalities (AGFS) for a number of years.
It is time that the city, as part of the necessary transportation revolution, pays more attention to pedestrian traffic.
We are fighting for the recapture of road space by pedestrians and cyclists.
For this purpose, the available road cross-section must be planned differently in the future.
Parking cars on cycle paths could cost up to 100 euros.
sidewalks must be available with a sufficient minimum.
The entrances to above-ground tram stops (for example Funkenburg stop) must also be made more pedestrian-friendly.
We want to make public transport free for school pupils and apprentices, and we want students to benefit from this as much as possible.
For us, this combines social justice, climate justice and the need for young people to be independent.
Public transport as a climate-friendly means of transport must become more attractive.
The current VRR social ticket does not meet this demand, it is much too expensive at almost 40 euros.
Fewer and fewer low-income and poor people can afford a social ticket at this price.
The CDU and FDP state government refuses to finally increase the subsidy of 40 million euros in a reasonable way.
We are fighting for the state to fulfill its responsibility and provide more funds.
We want a quick implementation of the existing plans.
We are advocating for more level crossings with traffic lights to the city instead of expensive bridges and repair-prone elevator solutions.
The support for passengers at DSW21 is significantly higher than for users of bus and train.
Deconstruction of the Dortmund airport is not justifiable from an environmental perspective.
We consider the expansion of the airport to be irresponsible from a climate policy perspective.
It is crucial that such a change takes place in close coordination with employees and their representatives.
Airport noise is noise that causes stress and illnesses in a particular way, as studies have shown.
We demand the dismantling of the airport.
This will return a large open space to the city – and with it the chance for an ecologically valuable and sustainable new development.
The many fare zones contradict the desire for an ever closer metropolis of the Ruhr and are no longer comprehensible to people.
A reform of the fare system is needed, which is understandable to all.
The potential for wind energy and photovoltaics (PV) is still.
Entire neighborhoods could cover their electricity needs and feed the same amount of electricity back into the grid.
We want to examine the legal possibilities for imposing a solar ordinance.
We demand an action program for the city's real estate industry to achieve the goal of climate neutrality.
We reject the purchase and transport of biomass from factory farming.
The city has a significant real estate portfolio, which should be managed in a climate-neutral way.
Dortmund should take on a pioneering role and do everything to replace coal and oil.
After the Corona crisis, we must use the opportunity for a new beginning and show that climate protection pays off in the long term.
We must urgently oblige DEW21 to create new concepts for the energy supply of the future.
The implementation with the help of EU funds must follow.
The ecological balance of building materials must be included in urban construction.
Promote climate protection for hotels, offices and commercial properties.
The district will thus become the nucleus for future urban development.
Concepts for local electricity storage can be developed and implemented with the help of digital solutions and artificial intelligence.
The electricity supply of the future should no longer be in the hands of just a few large companies, but should consist of many small electricity producers.
The conversion of the district heating from steam to hot water by DEW21 aims to create a heat network.
This will save 45,000 tonnes of CO2 per year.
Dortmund is envied by other cities for this unique opportunity to re-municipalise the energy supply.
A public debate must be held about the future of DEW21.
We want to actively promote the expansion of renewable energy on a decentralised basis with the participation of citizen energy companies and energy cooperatives.
The Greens demand that the administration and municipal subsidiaries only invest public funds in companies that focus on sustainable and climate-friendly energy generation.
Dortmund is committed to the development and preservation of green spaces, natural and natural habitats in the city area.
Fine dust leads to numerous premature deaths every year and can lead to allergies and lung diseases.
The preservation of open spaces such as Wickede-West or Rhader Hof is an important soft location factor for the economic development and quality of life.
Additional building areas should therefore be realized on previously used fallow land.
Dortmund is a founding member of the "Municipalities for Biological Diversity" The city's biodiversity strategy was decided for Dortmund at the request of GREENS.
The ban on glyphosate on urban areas and the decision against gravel gardens in new building areas are a start.
But the topic must also be given greater consideration in the landscape plan, which is currently being newly established.
We want to promote the species diversity of flora and This includes not only the preservation and expansion of contiguous green spaces and diverse wildflower meadows.
Trees provide shade, offer nesting sites for birds and make a decisive contribution to improving the climate.
More trees are to be accommodated through the redesign of the road space and additional locations for tree discs.
Green roofs are to become mandatory in principle in the sense of climate adaptation in all new buildings.
The creation of green corridors within industrial areas also offers the possibility of integrating the corresponding measures into an overall city greening concept.
Forestry is very long-term, which is why there must be immediate and comprehensive precautionary measures against the increasing risk of drought damage, forest fires, storms and insect damage.
The "wilderness proportion" in the municipal forest must therefore be increased to at least 10 percent.
Agricultural land use must not be seen as an interim solution on the way to residential and commercial development.
The city, as the lessee of the majority of agricultural land, must promote the conversion to organic farming.
We want to introduce a deposit system for coffee-to-go cups in the city.
We also want to offer a regular free bulky waste collection service.
Dortmund has already declared areas at the main train station and on Westenhellweg as a fireworks-free zone on New Year's Eve.
We are campaigning for the expansion of these zones.
In total, fewer fireworks are to take place in future.
In urban areas, we want to strengthen bird- and insect-friendly gardening.
Wild animals do not belong in the circus ring, because they have particularly high demands on their care and accommodation.
We are committed to municipal regulations so that circuses in Dortmund will only show wildlife-free shows in the future.
We support the concerns of animal welfare organizations to no longer allow providers of trophy hunting at the ‘Jagd & Hund’ trade fair.
Dortmund is a city of diversity with over 600,000 individual stories.
Young or old, female, male or diverse, born on Borsigplatz or Bosporus, heterosexual or LSBTTIQ, atheist or religious – diversity is our strength.
We see diversity as an enrichment and an opportunity for the further development of our city.
We want to strengthen the protection of farm animals, wild animals and pets in Dortmund.
Over a third of the citizens of Dortmund have a migration history.
Many have lived in Dortmund for many decades, many were born here, went to school here, live and work.
They encountered an overwhelming culture of welcome and the solidarity of many Dortmunders.
We are committed to accommodating as many refugees as possible in their own homes as quickly as possible.
We will work to ensure that Dortmund gets its own Museum of Migration.
This will document the history of immigration permanently.
We are committed to improving the situation of the affected people and creating ways out of illegality into secure residence.
We, the Greens, have fought for Dortmund to declare itself a “Safe Haven’ for refugees rescued from the Mediterranean.
We want to ensure that the Council’s resolution is implemented and that the additional admission of refugees is carried out within the framework of future national admission programs.
We are calling for the administration to follow positive decisions and requests from the petitions committee and hardship commission.
We want to strengthen the Integration Council as a strong community interest group for migrants.
We want a diverse and open urban society without social and ethnic exclusion.
We are fighting for a cross-departmental urban development that promotes city-wide integration and prevents a separation according to ethnicity or income in the city districts.
Social services for the elderly should always be tailored to the needs of older migrants.
Financial security in old age, the desire to participate and culturally sensitive health care and nursing care must be ensured.
In recent years, many people from Southeast Europe have moved to Dortmund legally as EU citizens.
Almost 3,000 of them are now employed in a social insurance-covered capacity or as low-paid employees.
For many of the newcomers, the search for work and the start of work is still difficult.
We are committed to a social infrastructure that is fair to different life stories.
B 1.
Increase in funds for municipal educational work Germany has long since become an immigration country.
We are committed to opening up personal and professional perspectives for them and thus integrating them into society.
B 2.
Fair participation in working life More women in leadership positions.
B 3.
Tailor-made educational offers for children and young people.
Equal Pay Day is the international day of action to draw attention to the “gender pay gap” Women-dominated professions in personal social services (nursing, education, care, social work, counseling) are not valued according to their requirements and are therefore not paid fairly.
We demand the upgrading of these professions.
At the federal level, we demand an effective equal pay law.
We are calling for time, power, money and opportunities to be shared fairly between women and men.
There is no legal entitlement to protection and assistance, nor is there a nationwide regulation for funding.
The Dortmund women's shelter currently has 32 places: 16 each for women and children.
We want the different perspectives of people in all policy areas and within the city administration to be recognized.
We support initiatives for the conceptual further development of the women's shelter.
Professional psychosocial counselling requires communication in the mother tongue.
We are committed to ensuring that the services provided for the children are continued in a targeted and long-term manner.
The project "Real Men Talk" by the SKM advises men who have become violent towards their partners.
Men can learn to understand the background of their crisis, take responsibility and change their behavior.
Dortmund LSBTTIQ landscape is diverse.
This is especially true for counseling services for young people.
The Sunrise youth education and counseling center at the Fritz-Henßler-Haus offers a safe space for queer youth and young adults to openly discuss their experiences with their peers.
The SCHLAU project, which is carried out by SLADO, is an anti-discrimination project that deals with the sexual and gender diversity of young people in schools and youth centers.
Many LSBTTIQ experience discrimination on the basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity, up to physical attacks.
We stand for a (city) society in which all people can be different without fear and live their differences with self-awareness and self-determination.
We want to prevent discrimination in all areas and eliminate existing discrimination.
We welcome and support the establishment of inclusive businesses or departments for integration.
The Greens have repeatedly brought the introduction of an accompanying service for bus and train journeys into the political discussion.
Such a service is aimed at passengers who use a wheelchair, rollator or walking aid, people with visual impairments, the blind or deaf, as well as passengers who feel insecure when using public transport.
We are advocating for a concept for the expansion of public toilets and for the city-wide implementation of the ‘Nette Toilette’ project.
We Greens will continue to fight for a diverse, varied and contemporary orientation of Dortmund's cultural scene.
Culture should take place in all districts and not be limited to the city center.
We are fighting for the introduction of a "Kombiticket Kultur", which allows free use of public transport to attend events at all Dortmund cultural institutions.
We want to support and secure the future of children's and youth offers such as the art courses of the Museum Ostwall or other museums for children and young people.
Culture and art sustainably shape the face of a city.
Es Culture is a community asset, whose infrastructure is largely publicly funded – and that must remain the case.
We demand more spaces for free design as well as for network and local work, in order to give people on the ground more opportunities for individual and lively development.
The municipal museums are places of remembrance, public urban space and at the same time extra-curricular educational institutions.
We want Dortmund to develop a creative, diverse and lively (night) culture with young people.
The abolition of the curfew is an essential part of this.
Offers for amateur sports must become an equal component in the ‘Masterplan Sport’ and general urban development.
We want a concept that ensures the widest possible access to our sports facilities for everyone.
We are advocating for more free spaces to be made available for sport, play and leisure.
We want sports facilities to be multifunctional in future: for different sports and for different generations.
The sports allowance and the school allowance must be listed as separate pots in the municipal financing act.
We want to promote the cooperation of schools, kindergartens and swimming clubs for more water acclimatization and swimming lessons.
People with disabilities must have equal access to sport.
In Germany, 80 percent of sports promotion is carried out by the municipalities.
We Greens are committed to more sport and exercise – in clubs or self-organized, in amateur or professional sports.
Sport teaches values such as fairness, tolerance and respect and can help to reduce prejudice.
To achieve this, we need to work with the City Sports Association to train more qualified instructors.
Cooperation between clubs offers the opportunity to jointly provide services and share instructors.
Children and young people must be able to meet, play, frolic, climb and relax in the fresh air.
We are focusing on a motion-oriented infrastructure when planning new districts.
We want all sports facilities to be quickly and safely accessible by bike.
Action plan against right-wing extremism, first created 10 years ago at the request of GREENS, is a success.
We support the Exit and Victim Advice BackUp-ComeBack.
Their project U-Turn accompanies, advises and supports people who want to leave the right-wing extremist scene.
In various districts, organizations, clubs, churches and individuals have come together to form round tables against the right.
We are committed to founding round tables of this kind in as many districts as possible.
We also demand that counter-demonstrators be protected and that their demonstrations are not unreasonably hindered.
We Greens are standing up to all of this with a clear commitment against racism and anti-Semitism and for diversity and democracy.
We demand a thorough investigation of the NSU terror and the uncovering of the connections with the Nazi scene in Dortmund.
Institutional racism means the systematic degradation and disadvantage of social groups in organizations, institutions and authorities.
For us Greens, it is therefore necessary to have a broad discussion in politics and society about institutional racism.
Dortmund is growing.
The population has increased by around 13,300.
Despite many new buildings, the housing market is not keeping up with this steady growth.
The average net cold rent has risen by a total of 20 percent to currently 7.00 €/sqm (2019) on average.
Only 7.5 percent of the total Dortmund housing stock were subsidized apartments in 2018 - and the trend is still declining.
Dortmund is one of the ten regions with the highest poverty rate according to the figures of the Paritätischer Wohlfahrtsverband.
More and more people in Dortmund are dependent on state support in addition to their retirement benefits.
The 2018 Social Report considers the social situation in Dortmund according to criteria such as income level, children’s educational opportunities and participation in the labor market.
The city's own housing company must ensure that it eases the housing market.
This is achieved by the increased construction of subsidised housing by the city.
DOGEWO21 should develop into a socially oriented, municipal company in the future.
The goal is to build around 500 subsidised homes for all generations and target groups from single households to families with children in the next electoral period.
Housing as a basic right in Dortmund.
We want to enable all locals and newcomers to be self-determined tenants.
Barrier-free living is a social justice!
There will be no winners who do not build barrier-free.
Student housing should be developed especially on the HSP site if the University of Applied Sciences is to be located here in the future.
The city of Dortmund is put in a position to actively and steeringly take influence on the land market and its (urban) development.
The granting of leasehold property not only secures the municipal property portfolio, but also generates long-term income through the ground rent.
The promotion of rental housing must be given priority, both in new building areas and in the densification of existing building areas.
The city must also be enabled to buy new land.
We want to avoid sealing off new areas in Dortmund as far as possible.
The conversion and reuse of already developed plots of land and the activation of abandoned land has absolute priority over new development.
Multi-storey construction with offices and/or apartments on the upper floors will become the standard for supermarkets in the future.
A GREEN city is not an end in itself.
It is primarily about improving people’s lives, especially for the lower-income Dortmund residents, who are often the ones who have to live on noisy streets with high levels of air pollution.
They are particularly dependent on social and ecological development of the city.
We want to create opportunities and facilities that allow free participation in social life.
We Greens are in favor of a quicker removal of illegal waste dumps by the EDG.
We want to employ more staff in areas with a particularly high proportion of polluted areas, including parks and forests.
Offers for free and pleasant stay in public spaces are an investment in a lively and just community.
We are committed to ensuring that the road space becomes a space for people and is available to all road users on an equal basis.
Noise not only affects the quality of life, but also has an impact on health.
Speed limits of 30 km/h must be the norm.
The assessment of climate neutrality must in future be mandatory for municipal construction projects.
We reject the displacement of homeless people and poverty, homelessness and lack of housing also belong to the social reality and the cityscape in Dortmund.
Non-Dortmund residents and EU immigrants can only use the overnight shelters for one night free of charge.
This means that these groups are effectively excluded from warm and safe overnight accommodation.
Since the end of 2018, there has been a bus that is organized by the Malteser Hilfsdienst Dortmund.
The bus provides tea, coffee and hot soup, hygiene articles, warm clothing and sleeping bags for homeless people in the city center.
There is still no independent low-threshold concept or emergency aid program to improve the living conditions of those affected.
An essential part of such a program must be medical care.
We want to strengthen the existing day care centers and secure them with municipal funds.
Due to the increased and continuously increasing number of homeless people, more small decentralized day care center are necessary.
In January of this year, there were still over 83,000 in over 42,000 households in need.
The Job Center is already supporting employers who integrate the long-term unemployed into the first labor market.
We want to create opportunities for participation and strengthen the social and ecological infrastructure in the districts of the city.
The integration of refugees who have come to us, as well as EU immigrants into the job market is a special challenge.
We stand for a city in which equal opportunities, fair distribution and self-determination are guaranteed for all people.
Qualification as the key to employment plays a central role in overcoming unemployment.
For us, inclusion is a cross-cutting task that affects all areas of life, especially that of the elderly.
Barrier-free access must also be guaranteed in all buildings that receive investment subsidies from the city of Dortmund.
We are committed to making participation in everyday life self-explanatory.
Municipal event halls should be equipped or retrofitted with inductive hearing systems.
A public transportation escort service accompanies passengers from their front door to all the public transportation required on their way to their destination.
We are advocating for a concept to expand and regularly and comprehensively clean public toilets, as well as for the city-wide implementation of the “Nette Toilette” project.
Many people in Dortmund are growing older.
Our goal is for them to be able to live independently and actively for as long as possible.
Most people want to stay in their familiar surroundings and participate in everyday life even when they are old.
This includes good local amenities, good and affordable public transport, sufficient health care and easily accessible and well-equipped meeting and advice centres.
We want to examine the establishment of health kiosks in Dortmund.
We are committed to further expanding the services of the senior citizens' offices.
Increasingly culturally sensitive contact persons are necessary, especially in light of the many older immigrants.
Strengthening the prevention of drug abuse for children and young people.
Expanding opening hours and the use of the drug consumption room.
We are advocating for the legal and controlled distribution of cannabis.
This is intended to strengthen the protection of young people and consumers – in contrast to a ban.
If there is the possibility of model projects for the controlled distribution, we want to use it for Dortmund.
The Nordstadt urgently needs further help with regard to the drug situation.
Soft and hard drugs are consumed and traded on playgrounds, on public streets and squares.
The drug consumption room already available at Grafenhof is not used by many addicts in the Nordstadt due to its distance.
We are committed to creating additional low-threshold support services for addicts that will also help local residents.
Dortmund has a broad and well-established offer of substitution treatment with over 40 substituting doctors as well as the Methadone ambulance of the health department.
For many years, the Green Party faction in the council has also been calling for a Diamorphine prescription for heavy addicts.
Many of them are in an existentially threatening situation, which has been significantly exacerbated by the high level of control pressure after the closure of the street.
Even minors are prostituting themselves in Dortmund or are forced to become part of prostitution.
Many women practice prostitution in secret and without the knowledge of their private environment.
The provision of diamorphine offers a way to break the vicious circle of addiction and prostitution.
We are fighting for the financing and securing of help offers and exit work, prevention in schools and online counselling.
In Dortmund, over 1,000 women and men work in prostitution.
Counselling is only funded by the state for women who have become prostitutes.
There is no evidence that repression and criminalization prevent prostitution.
Banning prostitution does not make it disappear, as experience in other countries shows.
Instead, we want to strengthen counseling and support services.
UN Human Rights Committee has repeatedly renewed its demand for an independent mechanism for investigating complaints about the unlawful use of force by police officers.
We reject the equipping of municipal employees with batons or other weapons.
We are fighting for urban planning and development that places the safety of public spaces and paths at the center.
Places and paths must be easy to see, well lit and barrier-free.
The fencing off of public areas with the aim of driving out undesirables.
A safe Dortmund also includes the strengthening of the fire department and disaster control.
We are advocating for a controlled distribution of cannabis.
This would not only decriminalize adult consumers, but also reduce the black market on streets, squares or C 7.
Strong neighbourhoods and lively districts strengthen social cohesion, lead to a higher quality of living environment and strengthen security.
The city is required to support self-initiated projects within the scope of its possibilities, to record and mediate open spaces and to be available as a contact partner, for example for legal problems.
In an ageing society, the demands on an effective emergency service are increasing.
We are committed to ensuring that all citizens are comprehensively and transparently informed about how they should behave in the event of danger.
The options that have been used up to now must be reviewed and, if necessary, supplemented.
We support the commitment of the fire department and aid organizations in gaining new participants – especially from Dortmund residents with a migration background.
We also support the fireDepartment with a strong emphasis on promoting young people and the youth fire department.
Fight against poverty and especially child poverty is and will remain a priority goal of Dortmund's urban development.
We are committed to a city in which children and young people are not disadvantaged due to their (social) background.
We want to improve and equalize the very different starting conditions of many children.
This is necessary, among other things, to break the existing connection between poverty and unfair educational opportunities.
When creating educational justice, unequal things must be treated unequally.
D in which children can move freely.
Families need affordable housing that is tailored to their needs.
With traffic-calmed or car-free zones, D 1.2 Self-determined childhood and youth.
We GREENS do not want to shape Dortmund for children and young people, but with them.
Regardless of whether they are entitled to vote or not: Everyone in Dortmund should be able to help shape the city.
We want to strengthen and modernise open youth work as an important field of extra-curricular learning experiences.
We are committed to ensuring that there are corresponding spaces and areas in every district where young people can try out their cultural, musical or sporting activities.
This also applies to rehearsal rooms for young bands.
We rely on dialogue and compromise rather than bans in the event of conflicts arising from different needs – especially between young people and older people.
Vote GREEN for: Acceptance and equal treatment of all sexual identities of children and youth.
We Greens want a well-equipped youth welfare service that supports young people – and also young adults – in growing up.
We support the Dortmund Girls’ Network as a municipal alliance for the concerns and needs of girls and young women.
The Greens want gender-specific youth work to be strengthened.
We want a youth parliament with its own budget and the right to speak in council meetings.
We are committed to preventing young people from slipping into human-hating and violence-glorifying ideologies.
A high-quality care place in a day care centre or in a childminder must be available to every child if required.
The number of care places planned so far for 41 percent of children under three is not enough for the increasing number of children and the needs of many parents.
We want to maintain and expand existing counselling and support services.
Currently there are 88 day care centers in Dortmund.
We are committed to further expanding the number of family centers.
Nurseries are large-scale childcare facilities, in which a maximum of nine children are cared for by three day care providers.
The pedagogical focus is on language development and movement, and is intended to prepare children for the transition to day care.
It is not enough that the state only provides the last two years of free childcare.
We demand a land-wide uniform assessment.
High-quality, reliable, sufficient and financially viable or, if possible, free care options are an important key to this.
The proportion of the municipal FABIDO facilities in the total city child care places should be at least 30 percent.
We want to lease municipal land for the construction of new day care centers to investors as long as possible.
We are committed to high-quality care in the facilities with the binding implementation of pedagogical quality criteria.
Early childhood education is a decisive key to participation and educational justice for all children.
Fresh, healthy and varied food is an important part of this – with foods predominantly from the region and organic quality.
We support the use of the “optiMIX” quality seal of the Research Institute for Children’s Nutrition.
By 2021, all municipal day care centers will be certified as “Fair Day Care Centers” We are committed to ensuring that children come into contact with nature at an early age.
For new constructions of day care centres, adequately equipped kitchens must be planned in.
We want to reach and support particularly disadvantaged children and families early on, even in day care facilities.
Gender-sensitive education should continue to be promoted.
Good education requires good schools.
The number of pupils at primary schools will rise by around 3,000 to 25,500 in the coming years.
All existing primary school sites must be retained in view of the rising number of children.
The need for new schools or extensions to existing schools must be taken into account when planning new building developments.
We want to develop our primary schools into family centres.
This is intended to extend the tried and tested work of family centres in child day care facilities to primary schools.
More and more parents in Dortmund are choosing comprehensive schools for their children.
For years the places available throughout the city have not been enough.
In the future there will be a shortage of several hundred places.
We need to expand the capacities of the existing grammar schools and possibly build an additional school.
Parents who decide to send their children to a special school must have comprehensive options.
We want an education system that gives children security, self-confidence and security.
We are committed to ensuring that every child is promoted as best as possible.
A good education system is always a fair education system with real opportunities for all.
The vocational colleges are an essential part of the dual education system.
We want to break down the classic separation between lessons and subsequent care at schools.
Good, high-quality and reliable care after school is not only family-friendly, but also offers space for joint formal and informal learning.
We want a school education that gives children self-confidence, security and a sense of belonging.
Education must preserve and promote the joy of learning that every child brings with them.
We stand for the right to the best possible social and scholastic development for all pupils, for an inclusive school system, for joint lessons for pupils with and without disabilities.
The municipal master plan ‘Digital Education’ is to be continually developed with the participation of all relevant actors.
We are committed to creating the spatial conditions necessary for communal learning.
Our schools are to be designed to be barrier-free in principle.
We want to motivate grammar schools to open up to joint learning.
For an expansion of joint learning, the state must make special needs educational support staff available.
Free tickets for all students Access to education and participation must not be made more difficult by mobility barriers.
We want to promote and strengthen the self-determined, safe and sustainable mobility of children and young people.
The program "So läuft das" to promote children's and youth mobility has developed appropriate concepts for the first primary schools.
Schoolyards are more than just a break room.
They are a space for relaxation, but also for movement and communication.
In many residential areas and neighborhoods, there are only a few play and recreational opportunities for children.
In Dortmund, one in three children under the age of 15 is affected by poverty or is at risk of poverty.
We want to prevent social segregation by promoting longer joint learning.
Schools with the greatest social and educational challenges require the greatest support.
We are committed to ensuring that all Dortmund schools receive at least one position for school social work.
We want to open our schools beyond the classroom as places of life and learning.
We want to sustainably improve the working and studying conditions at Dortmund’s universities through improved transport and housing infrastructure.
Dortmund should follow the example of popular study locations such as Leipzig and see itself as a real university and student city.
The framework for school social work in Dortmund should be continuously evaluated and further developed.
The attractiveness and internationality of the city must be further increased for students, lecturers and researchers to win even more expertise, creativity and variety for Dortmund.
Dortmund is one of the largest university locations in Germany.
It has more than 50,000 students, seven universities and around 20 non-university scientific institutions.
The success of local companies will depend heavily in the future on how sustainably they design their working conditions, production processes and products.
Climate and environmental protection must play a much greater role in future industrial areas.
The state is called on to support Dortmund in the remediation of contaminated sites.
Dortmund has developed in the past ten years from a beer, coal and steel region to a diverse economic location with a good mix of small and large companies.
We want to sharpen the profile of a dynamic city with good working conditions, promote cooperation and alliances.
We also want to sensitize Dortmund companies to current trends and their ecological and social responsibility and make them fit for the future.
The aim is to D 5.2 Infrastructure as a location factor for companies and employees.
A good connection of business areas to public transport and the cycle network.
Dortmund has the opportunity to contribute to an ecologically sound transformation of freight transport.
Goods are still mainly transported by lorry in Dortmund, which contributes significantly to the congestion of our roads.
We Greens stand for the consistent use of these potentials to promote rail freight transport and the use of waterways to bundle transport.
We also understand intelligent transport logistics to mean the avoidance of unnecessary individual transport, because the journey that does not take place at all contributes the most to a healthy climate.
We want to support companies in setting up company.
We have always advocated for the appreciation and support of migrant entrepreneurs.
Quartiere Ruhr wants to strengthen and expand the creative.
economy.
New ideas need spaces, infrastructure, support measures and start-up aid.
Pop-up stores and coworking spaces should be created in the city centre.
We want to ensure that growth and competition are sustainable and fair.
The welfare of people and the environment must be brought into harmony.
We want to create a common good balance sheet for all city-owned companies, based on the city's Public Corporate Governance Code.
We want to promote sustainable and existential employment for all qualifications in Dortmund through a qualified settlement policy.
We Greens support it when the city and the municipal companies, as well as private companies, award their contracts to local or regional small and medium-sized enterprises.
The church tower mentality must be overcome in favour of a regional economic location and a regional labour market.
Regionally coordinated settlement of retail trade is an important building block for this.
We want the cities of the Ruhr area not to see themselves as competitors, but to support each other in the revitalization of their city centers.
We are against large retail settlements in non-integrated areas and advocate a city of short distances with a diverse and good local supply.
The administration is to use its powers to a greater extent to enable Dortmund residents to deal with their official matters online.
The forms must be comprehensible and usable for everyone, i.e.
both barrier-free and multilingual.
Dortmund is already making an important contribution to combating youth unemployment through its training offer for school leavers.
It covers a large proportion of its personnel requirements with its own young employees.
This year, the city founded the Centre for Training and Skills (ZAK) as a central facility for this.
There are still too few women in leadership positions in the administration, even though the majority of employees in the city are female.
The city's own companies and subsidiaries are still far from achieving a gender-balanced distribution of positions.
We want the regulations of the NRW Equal Opportunities Act to be applied in the own companies.
Half of the supervisory boards, executive boards and management boards should be occupied by women.
The offer of flexible working time models (including home office) is to be continually expanded with the involvement of the works council.
The common good economy is a step towards an economic system that primarily places people at the center.
We are advocating for the necessary occupational health services for the city administration to be provided centrally by the Dortmund Clinic.
We want the municipal companies to draw up social balance sheets or to present social and ecological criteria in the financial reports on an equal footing with financial criteria.
By investing public funds, cities can have a direct influence on sustainable production and socially just action.
Investments in environmentally damaging forms of energy must be excluded.
Greens call for a debt relief fund that allows for complete repayment after 30 years.
Since 2007, Dortmund has been committed to fair and sustainable procurement.
In future, criteria for promoting women and reconciling work and family life will also be taken into account in tenders and the awarding of municipal contracts.
Greens want to use the knowledge of many for planning and decision-making processes in good time, so that better thought-out, accepted and therefore faster solutions can be found.
The goal of involving the people of Dortmund in the financial prioritization of the city through a “citizens’ budget” has not worked well in the past.
We are committed to ensuring that all people benefit equally from the positive aspects of the digital transformation.
In order to intensify transparency and participation, we demand the establishment of the position of a participation officer.
The person can coordinate the work of the district committees and the council, but also act as a contact person for citizens.
We use open source software to promote transparency, data protection and the right to informational self-determination in data processing.
Free Wi-Fi for the city centre and district centres.
We Greens want to take advantage of the opportunities of flexibilization.
We see the chance, through new technology, to further develop social and labor standards.
We Greens demand that there must be spaces in which smart solutions are tested.
We want to expand the participation rights of citizens in the meetings of the committees instead of restricting them.
We are committed to broadcasting public council meetings live on the internet.
This makes political decisions more transparent and leads to a lower distance between citizens and their elected representatives.
The "Smart City Alliance" as a network of companies should channel the diverse commercial interests of the parties involved.
We are committed to giving members of the Integration Council, the Senior Council and the Disability Policy Network a fixed right to speak in the district councils.
The possibilities of the committee for “Citizen Services, Public Order’, suggestions and complaints are too little known to citizens.
We want to introduce digital participation and examine the youth parliament.
Dortmund has 600,000 heads – let’s use them.
We stand for an active civil society, whose advice and decision-making we want to involve even more.
We want to develop and expand new procedures that involve as many people as possible.
Platforms for online participation, citizen expert opinions, future workshops, online petitions and participation budgets are possible forms.
We are committed to finding project-based forms of participation that allow for the broadest possible participation.
Free flow of information from the state to the citizens strengthens and revitalizes democracy, because it makes participation possible.
We stand for an open and transparent administration and are committed to ensuring that all citizens in Dortmund can easily access municipal information on the basis of the law.
We continue to support and promote voluntary work as a valuable contribution to social and political welfare and integration.
We want to promote networking among volunteers and with professionals through online platforms.
We will ensure that no tasks from paid areas are outsourced to volunteers in order to save costs.
Our direct candidates in the electoral districts are: Leander Schreyer, Hannah Sassen and Martina Stackelbeck.