The future is being decided here.Election program for Dortmund 3The Corona pandemic, which has turned the lives of all people upside down in recent weeks and has been associated with tangible losses and restrictions for many people, has shown us: a community that is solidary, a good administration that is capable of taking action, a policy of precaution that maintains and intelligently expands the capacity of the state and local authorities, are important prerequisites for managing crises and cushioning their effects.
At the same time, the crisis has made it clear to us that our way of life is not as secure as we often thought it was - a realization that we have already become aware of in the debate about the climate crisis.
As the GREENS, we want to provide answers for our city: for a policy of precaution that makes Dortmund a livable city and strengthens us as a community.
With this election program, we are making you proposals: • for the change of mobility and transport - we enable the use of bicycles, buses and trains, car-sharing, • for the strengthening of our local economy - so that good jobs for employees and In September you have the opportunity to vote for a political change in Dortmund city politics towards a GREEN policy.
We GREENs stand for: better traffic policy with a balance of interests between road users, solidarity with one another and strengthening the democratic middle, educational justice with opportunities for children and young people, economic growth with ecological responsibility, nature protection with better quality of life and climate protection in our city.
This change needs people who are willing to work towards this and who have the ability and willingness to implement this together with you as Dortmund residents: a mayor at the head of the administration, strong council factions and district councils, a strengthened integration council – and a directly elected Ruhr parliament as a strong link and support for Dortmund in the region.
GREEN IS...
Consistent climate and environmental protection!
7 How we want to become a climate-neutral and ecological city.
A 1.
Traffic revolution with speed (mobility)  7 A 1.1 More road traffic in the city  7 A 1.2 Clean driving  8 A 1.3 Better walking through the city  9 A 1.4 Good offer in Animal protection 20 GREEN IS...
Diversity and participation for all!
2 1 How we want to create equal opportunities and possibilities for all people.
B 1.
Participation in the immigration society: Diversity is our strength 2 1 B 1.1.
Strengthening a culture of diversity and equal coexistence 21 B 1.2 Protection and help for people without a secure residence status 22 B 1.3 Promotion of political, social and cultural participation 22 B 1.4 Fair participation and social security for all 23 B 1.5 Educational justice in the immigration society 24 B 2.
Give half the power to women: creating gender justice 25 B 2.1 Fair participation in working life 25 B 2.2 Violence against women 25 B 2.3 Safe and social housing for women 26 B 3.
LSBT TIQ people: Living and recognising diversity  27 B 3.1 Strengthening LSB TTIQ organisations and initiatives  27 B 3.2 LSB TTIQ life in Dortmund  27 B 4.
Participation and participation for all: Implementing inclusion  29 B 5.
A free and open city society: Strengthening art and culture  30 B 6.
Living together in motion: Sport brings people together  32 B 7.
365 days a year for human rights, diversity and democracy: Standing up against the right  34 GREEN IS...
Social justice!
37 How we want to strengthen social cohesion, fairness and mutual support.
C 1.
Living and urban development  37 C 1.1 Living must be affordable  37 C 1.2 Land is a common good  39 C 1.3 A liveable Dortmund  40 C 2.
Homeless aid  43 C 3.
Municipal labour market policy – participation for the long-term unemployed  45 C 4.
Growing old in Dortmund  46 C 4.1  Inclusive and strong infrastructure for the elderly  46 C 4.2  Growing old in a self-determined way  47 C 5.
Eye care in Dortmund: help instead of sanctions  48 C 6.
Help for people in prostitution  50 C 7.
Safety in Dortmund: respecting citizens' rights  51 C 7.1  Police, city and citizens working in partnership  51A 5C 7.2  Citizens' engagement for a safe Dortmund  52 C 7.3  Future viability of fire brigade and civil protection  52 GREEN IS...
The future!
(C)  55 How we want to make Dortmund a city of tomorrow with good education, sustainable economy and a capable administration.
D 1.
Children and young people  55 D 1.1  Support for children and families  55 D 1.2  Self-determined childhood and youth  56 D 1.3  Colour your world  57 University and Science City of Dortmund  65 D 5.
Economy and Employment  66 D 5.1 The Markets of the Future are Green  66 D 5.2 Infrastructure as a Factor for Companies and Workers  67 D 5.3 Promoting Foundations - Promoting the Economy  67 D 5.4 Creating Good Jobs, Combining Economy and the Common Good  68 D 5.5 Using the Potential of the Ruhr Metropolitan Area  68 D 6.
City and Administration  70 D 6.1 Dortmund Close to its Citizens  70 D 6.2 The City as an Attractive Employer  70 D 6.3 The Common Good is an Economic Factor  80 D 6.4 Budget - Capable of Action and Future-Proof  81 D 6.5 Fair Commune  81 D 6.6 Digitalisation - Active, Sustainable, for People  73 D 7.
Transparency, Democracy, Participation and Co-determination  75 Our Direct Candid The proportion of cycling is only 10 percent.
In the future, cycling should play a priority role in urban and transport planning, in order to triple this and to encourage more car drivers in the city area to switch to cycling.
Green Wave for Cyclists The traffic planning in Dortmund needs a paradigm shift.
It is not the car traffic that needs to be made more attractive, but the environmentally friendly mobility must have priority in the future.
A green wave for cyclists promotes cycling and makes it safer.
Cyclists are recognized early when approaching the traffic lights and a corresponding program is initiated for a quick green light.
More streets to become bike streets Bike streets are a useful means of improving the cycling infrastructure.
Therefore, there must be significantly more than the current four in Dortmund.
The Wall must be made comfortable and safe for cycling in both directions.
The current designation of a short stretch of cycle path on the Ostwall is only a start for us.
In addition, an attractive crossing of the city for cycling is to be established in both east-west and north-south directions.
Cycle lanes must be redesigned and are not just blue signs, but require special infrastructure such as modal filters or braking bumps and minimum widths.
Good and safe cycle connections to the outskirts In order to make the connection between the city centre and the outskirts attractive for cyclists and establish it as an alternative to the car, the Dortmund district centres must be equipped with good cycle paths and must also be connected to one another via safe connecting routes.
The regional cycle network of the Regional Association of Ruhr (RVR) can also serve this purpose and must be used.
1.
TRAFFIC CHANGE WITH TEMPO (MOBILITY) In the spring of 2019, the people of Dortmund were asked for the third time how they mainly move around the city.
The result is disappointing: Although the proportion of cycling has increased since the last survey in 2013, overall the use of environmentally friendly modes of transport has decreased, while the proportion of car traffic has even increased.
Our goal is: Less car traffic in the city – more space for people.
Car-free neighborhoods can contribute to this, in which it is not only made clear that mobility is possible without your own car, but also what a gain in quality of life is associated with this in the residential area.
The car-centered traffic policy is a relic of the past.
The road space must be redistributed and the necessary space must be given to pedestrians, cyclists and public transport.
Our goal for a new and networked mobility in the Ruhr metropolitan area is not only the necessary contribution to climate protection, but also the increase in quality of life in the city.
CONSISTENT CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION!
Consistent climate and environmental protection!
How we want to become a climate-neutral and ecological city.
And be developed accordingly.
The construction of the RS 1 cycle highway should be speeded up.
Above all, commuters should be offered an alternative for the daily commute to work by the RS 1 through the Ruhr area and especially in Dortmund also to the campus of TU and FH.
In Dortmund, cycl Safe cycle paths through colour markings and protected bike lanes To make cycling safer, a visible protection area and spatial separation from car and lorry traffic is important in many places.
Useful instruments are colour marking of cycle paths, advanced parking areas and protected bike lanes on busy roads and where a speed limit of 30 is not feasible.
Priority rules or separate green phases for cyclists also make cycling safer.
Intersections are accident hotspots for cycling, they must be built safely for all turning manoeuvres and must be self-explanatory for users.
The establishment of diversions for cyclists at construction sites must also be consistently implemented.
More bicycle parking facilities, bicycle parking garages and service stations Citywide bicycle parking facilities must be adapted to the increasing proportion of cycling.
Their number must therefore be significantly increased in the coming years – without impeding the mobility of pedestrians.
For this we need more bicycle parking garages and areas with charging stations for the safe parking of e-bikes and cargo bikes.
In addition, service stations for cyclists with bicycle tools and air In addition to building bicycle garages in residential areas, we want to create such parking facilities in existing car parks.
It is important that cyclists can enter and exit these facilities without any conflicts.
In the area around Dortmund Central Station, we want to create many more protected parking facilities than the current plans for the renovation of the north side provide for.
Supporting the leasing infrastructure We want to create city-wide and regionally networked sharing offers for bicycles, cargo bikes, etc.
Within the framework of parking space regulations, supportive regulations for leasing offers can be anchored, also to avoid obstacles to cycling and pedestrian traffic.
Bike and car sharing should also be taken into account in the context of concept awards in housing construction.
Additional resources for cycling planning We know that our ambitious goals for cycling can only be achieved if there are enough employees and sufficient funds for implementation.
That is why we will create further posts for cycling after the latest increase in the number of posts and invest 30 € per inhabitant annually in the long term, as successful Dutch cities and Copenhagen have shown.
A 1.2 Clean Our goal is to significantly reduce the proportion of car traffic by promoting environmentally friendly modes of transport.
In the future, the remaining car traffic will have to be significantly less emissions-intensive and more resource-friendly than before.
The facilitation of the combination of different modes of transport is a central component of multimodal transport, i.e.
the use of different modes of transport for a route.
They enable a sensible combination of modes of transport by linking buses and trains with car sharing, bike sharing, taxis and your own bicycle.
At our request, the construction of 12 mobility stations with charging stations was decided in 2019.
We will advocate for the expansion of further such nodes of climate-friendly modes of transport in the city.
Tempo 30 for a safe Dortmund: At 30 km/h, fewer and less serious accidents occur than at 50 km/h.
The noise decreases and the burden on the air with pollutants also decreases.
This is shown by corresponding pilot tests, among others.
That is why we want to introduce a 30 km/h speed limit in the city.
The federal government can only introduce a nationwide 30 km/h speed limit because the Road Traffic Regulations stipulate a 50 km/h speed limit in built-up areas.
We are campaigning for the corresponding amendment to the Road Traffic Regulations at the federal level and, until then, we want to prevent all municipal scope for the designation of speed races.
Supporters of the racing scene regularly organise races on various roads in Dortmund.
Racing endangers the lives of all road users and causes noise pollution for residents.
We want to push ahead with measures to prevent racing in Dortmund.
CONSISTENT CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION!
9This includes speed cameras on the roads where the races are held, regular checks and traffic light systems that do not allow driving on roads such as the Wall without red lights, especially at night.
Car-free centres In the short and medium term, we want to make more use of the concept of traffic-calmed shopping areas and set up 20 km/h zones in the entire area within the Wallring and on shopping streets with a lot of cycle and pedestrian traffic.
Long-term goals are a car-free city centre and further car-free zones throughout the city.
Changes to the car parking offer The car traffic, especially in the city centre, must be further reduced.
To achieve this, we want to reduce the number of parking spaces and significantly increase parking fees.
We want to invest the additional revenue from higher parking fees in the expansion and financing of the ÖP-NV offer and in cycling.
Public space is a scarce commodity, and a scarce commodity has value.
For over 20 years, the fees at the parking meters have remained unchanged: the first hour still only costs 1.50 euros.
At these prices, valuable city space is provided at below its value.
This offers no incentive to switch to public transport.
At the same time, significantly more staff must be made available to control Parking spaces should be created as space-saving as possible (for example Parking garages) or via Park-and-Ride offers.
The use of digitalization, for example Information on occupancy, can improve usage.
Parking spaces saved in the street area can be redesigned together with residents or initiatives as so-called parklets and used as a space with ecological and social added value.
New incentives for GREEN logistics The continuous increase in delivery traffic leads to great strain, especially in densely built inner city districts.
Delivery vehicles that park in the second row, on sidewalks, on bike paths and in crossings endanger other road users.
We are therefore advocating the establishment of cross-provider micro depots that enable low-noise and emission-free delivery by e-cars and cargo bikes, even during side and night times.
For this purpose, public parking spaces are to be made available at discounted rental prices.
A 1.3 Walking through the city of Dortmund has been a member of the Association of Cyclist- and Pedestrian-Friendly Towns and Municipalities (AGFS) for a number of years.
It is time that the city, as part of the necessary transportation revolution, pays more attention to pedestrian traffic.
Redistribution of road space We are fighting for the recapture of road space by pedestrians and cyclists.
For this purpose, the available road cross-section must be planned differently in the future: wide sidewalks, safe cycle paths, space for public transport and rows of trees are just as important to us as barrier-free and safe crossings.
Barrier-free infrastructure for pedestrian traffic Pedestrian traffic must be considered and taken into account as a separate form of mobility in urban planning.
In order to make walking more attractive, useful path networks with appropriate signage must be developed to link important destinations.
With the aim of also being able to reach destinations quickly and directly on foot, sidewalks must be available with a sufficient minimum The entrances to above-ground tram stops (for example Funkenburg stop) must also be made more pedestrian-friendly.
Better monitoring of stationary traffic In future, parking cars on cycle paths could cost up to 100 euros.
Not only do wrong parkers obstruct cyclists, but they also form dangerous obstacles, especially for pedestrians and people with restricted mobility.
In order to be able to effectively deal with wrong parkers on pavements and in crossroads, we demand significantly more staff for the municipal traffic supervision.
In addition, pavements and cycle paths should be protected by physical barriers (for example Bollards or planting) to prevent wrong parking.
Expansion of the “So läuft das” project The “So läuft das” concept for promoting children’s and youth mobility aims to promote the self-determined, safe and sustainable mobility of children and young people.
The concept for secondary schools is part of the “Emissions-free city centre” programme.
With an additional post, we were able to anchor the expansion of the project until 2022.
We are committed to ensuring that the programme is continued permanently and beyond the current scope (only schools and kindergartens in the city centre).
CONSISTENT CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION!
A 1.4 Good public transport offer In order for more people to use buses and trains, the infrastructure, the offer and the quality must be expanded.
This requires more money in the public transport system as a whole, but not through higher ticket prices.
We want to convince car drivers to switch to buses and trains.
However, for this to happen, the journey by car must not be the most comfortable and cheapest way.
For this, we need a public transport offer that is geared towards growth, is affordable, a reduction in parking spaces and more bus lanes and cycle lanes.
The current local transport plan, which forms the basis of the Dortmund plans for public transport, is from 2014 and still assumes a decline in the number of inhabitants.
The Free travel for young people We want to make public transport free for school pupils and apprentices, and we want students to benefit from this as much as possible.
For us, this combines social justice, climate justice and the need for young people to be independent.
That is why we want to gradually make public transport free for all school pupils and apprentices.
In future, we must prevent the VRR from raising the price of semester tickets for students.
Public transport as a climate-friendly means of transport must become more attractive.
It should be easy and comfortable to use, without having to spend a long time dealing with transport association boundaries and the question of the right ticket.
At the same time, ticket prices must be significantly reduced.
That is why we want to introduce a mobility flat rate for the whole of NRW – in consultation with the transport associations – which will allow all Dortmund residents to use all means of public transport in NRW for €1 per day.
At the same time as the price reduction, the expansion of the service and the increase in capacity must be driven forward.
A social ticket that deserves its name As long as there is no free public transport with buses and trains, people with low The current VRR social ticket does not meet this demand, it is much too expensive at almost 40 euros.
Fewer and fewer low-income and poor people can afford a social ticket at this price.
The CDU and FDP state government refuses to finally increase the subsidy of 40 million euros in a reasonable way.
We are fighting for the state to fulfill its responsibility and provide more funds.
If this is not foreseeable, we want to develop a concept with DSW 21 on how to lower the price of the social ticket with municipal funds so that it corresponds at most to the share of transport services in the ALG II standard rate.
We want to see a consistent expansion and a denser schedule for the city rail and bus lines.
We want to see an improvement in the schedule and connections for the city rail, buses and regional transport.
In the medium term, all lines of the city rail should run every 5 minutes during peak hours.
This must be accompanied by a significant increase in capacity through additional vehicles as well as the expansion of a basic public transport offer around the clock, including the expansion of the offer through night city rail in addition to the current night buses.
The An example of this is the good connection of the HSP site to the city tram, including the connection via the port to the main station.
Priority for public transportation Buses must become an attractive alternative to car traffic.
The introduction of separate bus lanes and priority traffic lights at particularly busy intersections and crossroads are important components.
They ensure that buses and trains depart and arrive on time and connections work, especially during rush hour.
Information boards with live data at all stops are a standard for customer-oriented public transportation.
Barrier-free buses and trains Around one third of bus and train stops are still not barrier-free.
We want a quick implementation of the existing plans.
We are advocating for more level crossings with traffic lights to the city instead of expensive bridges and repair-prone elevator solutions.
Our goal is short (transfer) distances, which improve the accessibility of stops and stations, especially for people with limited mobility.
We also want to install acoustic information sources (speaker announcements) at bus and train stops, which inform passengers of the arriving line and destination.
Connecting the entire city area With new residential areas, commercial areas or newly Public transport and cycling connections must be planned from the outset and also expanded and CONSISTENTLY CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENTALLY PROTECTED!
11 The extension of the city rail network must be implemented.
In future, planning must ensure that this access is available from the outset and is not created several years later.
In addition, the connection to the public transport and cycling network must be examined in existing residential and commercial areas.
Conversion of the vehicle fleet to alternative drives and autonomous systems.
The conversion of buses and trains to low-emission drive types is part of the EU's Clean Vehicle Directive.
We are committed to ensuring that DSW21 immediately creates the necessary conditions for implementation and submits an operating concept for the acquisition of appropriate buses and the establishment of the necessary infrastructure.
Together with the neighbouring transport associations, strategies for autonomous driving on roads and railways should also be developed in the long term.
It is crucial for us that such a change takes place in close coordination with employees and their representatives.
Deconstruction of the airport.
The Dortmund airport is not justifiable from an e The support for passengers at DSW21 is significantly higher than for users of bus and train.
While the city utilities only add around 40 cents for each passenger in the climate-friendly public transport system, each passenger is subsidised with over 6 euros.
Due to the connection to the regionally significant airports in the area such as Düsseldorf and Cologne-Bonn, Dortmund Airport is superfluous.
Apart from the economic reasons, we Greens also consider the expansion of the airport to be irresponsible from a climate policy perspective.
Apart from the CO2 emissions, aircraft also cause serious damage in the higher layers of the atmosphere.
In addition, an extension of operating hours is not acceptable for the residents.
Airplane noise is noise that causes stress and illnesses in a particular way, as studies have shown.
We therefore demand the dismantling of the airport and the conversion of the airport site.
This will return a large open space to the city – and with it the chance for an ecologically valuable and sustainable new development.
A 1.5 Regional Traffic The high numbers of commuters show how important it is for Dortmund to network the various modes This includes more mobility stations for us, but also a ticket for all modes of transport and, if possible, a fare in the whole of NRW.
In addition, the local public transport plans of the individual cities must be coordinated and lines must be continued across city boundaries without interruption.
The regional mobility concept of the RVR offers good solutions to the regional challenges.
Overcoming the fare and city boundaries.
For the customers of public transport, it makes no difference which company they are driven by or which public transport association they are currently travelling in.
In order to motivate daily commuters to switch from the car to public transport, we are committed to ensuring that customers in NRW no longer experience fare boundaries as tariff boundaries and that continuous connections are established across city boundaries.
To this end, we want to link municipal transport plans to a regional local public transport plan and make mobility easier with NRW-wide fares.
In addition, the fare system of the VRR must become simpler and cheaper.
The many fare zones contradict the desire for an ever closer metropolis of the Ruhr and are no longer comprehensible to people.
Here, a reform of the fare system is needed, which is understandable to all The connection of Bergkamen and Waltrop by train to Dortmund should also be examined.
The Emschertalbahn as an important east-west connection between the cities of the Lippe and Emscher areas should become more attractive again through the renovation of the tracks and shorter connection intervals.
In order to improve the acceptance of the necessary work, information must be provided early and comprehensively about upcoming construction sites and the established replacement transport.
The inclusion of previously rarely used regional trains in the S-Bahn system should be examined in order to achieve a good rhythm and an attractive offer.
In addition, the remaining diesel lines of regional trains should be electrified.
CONSISTENT CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION!
The connection of regional express buses to the surrounding area Where the connection to the Dortmund city center cannot be implemented in the long term via rail transport, we want to examine the use of regional express buses with alternative drives.
This should also make public transport more attractive for commuters from the surrounding area.
13A 2.1 Space for regenerative energy The potential for wind energy and photovoltaics (PV) is still Entire neighborhoods could cover their electricity needs with photovoltaic systems and feed the same amount of electricity back into the grid.
These are the results of the “InnovationCity Ruhr” in Bottrop, a project that deals with the climate-friendly conversion of an industrial city district and is to become a model for all Ruhr cities.
More solar energy for Dortmund We want to further promote the expansion of photovoltaic systems on both detached houses and rental properties and on buildings used for commercial purposes.
We support private individuals, cooperatives and tenant communities who want to switch to tenant electricity models.
Without further sealing of land, it is possible to further expand renewable energies.
We want to examine the legal possibilities for imposing a solar ordinance.
This is intended to ensure that a solar system is installed on every newly built building with corresponding potential.
We want to commission DEW21 to actively approach the owners of apartment buildings with a consulting offer, who according to the solar atlas have the potential for photovoltaics, and give them an effective incentive to install a solar system.
Freestanding solar systems are to be concentrated on We therefore want to build a biogas plant to process the organic waste in Dortmund.
However, we reject the purchase and transport of biomass from factory farming.
The schools and administrative buildings in the city are a good example.
The city has a significant real estate portfolio, which should be managed in a climate-neutral way by 2035 at the latest through energy-efficient renovation.
Public buildings should set a good example in terms of energy efficiency and the use of renewable energy.
We demand an action program for the city's real estate industry to achieve the goal of climate neutrality and, in particular, to prepare the schools as a place of learning for climate protection.
Sustainable construction using green energy and orienting ourselves towards the A 2.
ENERGY AND CLIMATE PROTECTION The Paris Climate Protection Agreement is binding.
And a city like Dortmund is called upon to counter the climate threat at the municipal level.
We see the city's obligation to change and to proactively support the commitment of local civil society and the private sector in reducing emissions.
The federal government and the state must set the necessary framework conditions for this, e.g For example, with sensible distance regulations for wind turbines, which promote the expansion of renewable energy instead of suffocating it, with simple conditions for tenant power models or with more incentives for energy-efficient renovation of existing buildings.
However, we want to use the EU funding now to reorganise the energy structure in Dortmund.
In the future, Dortmund should take on a pioneering role and do everything to replace coal and oil.
After the Corona crisis, we must use the opportunity for a new beginning and show that climate protection pays off in the long term.
We must urgently oblige DEW21 to create new concepts for the energy supply of the future.
The implementation with the help of EU funds must follow.
DEW21 must once again belong 100% to the citizens of Dortmund in order to ward off the influence of the energy giant EON as a shareholder.
The recently passed Climate Protection Act of the state government falls far short of expectations, the “unleashing package” of the black-yellow government has turned back all previously achieved regulations in favour of climate protection.
Nevertheless, with our own municipal utilities and a clear orientation towards The ecological balance of building materials must be included in urban construction.
Promote climate protection for hotels, offices and commercial properties.
With the help of economic development, private owners of non-residential buildings should be motivated to invest in the energy efficiency and sustainability of their properties.
Many companies are not aware of the funding opportunities and need to be convinced of the benefits of renovation.
Many measures are cost-effective and at the same time increase competitiveness.
The promotion of energy saving.
The NRW state government is promoting measures for energy efficiency through the NRW.BANK.
The state's funding programme is to be supported at the local level.
We want the city, in cooperation with DEW21, to additionally support low-income households with vouchers when exchanging old energy-guzzling appliances for new energy-efficient ones.
The municipal housing company Dogewo21 is also to work with the Verbraucherzentrale NRW on energy-related modernisation in order to enable free on-site advice for tenants on optimal heating and ventilation through the "Basic Energy Check".
Support for companies that produce the energy they We want to convert large parking areas that cannot be built on into solar parking lots with green roofs.
They will be covered with photovoltaic systems that generate regenerative electricity for charging stations and at the same time provide shade.
New energy concepts in the district With the instruments of building planning, the municipality can determine whether and which renewable energy form is to be used in the city area.
Projects should use the possibilities of digitalization and be tested and implemented in the district.
The district will thus become the nucleus for future urban development.
For example, new heat and cold networks (for example LowEx) can be built, which create seasonal storage possibilities for heat and cold energy.
Concepts for local electricity storage can be developed and implemented with the help of digital solutions and artificial intelligence.
We want to develop regional energy and communication concepts for the implementation of such models.
Of course, the "urban design" must put people at the center and take into account the important role of public participation.
Only if we involve all interests in the process of change will we be able to offer successful solutions.
A 2.2 Energy transition on site We will only achieve our climate protection goals if we convert our entire energy The energy transition is not just an electricity transition, but also a mobility and heating transition.
That is why the individual areas must be networked and coordinated with one another.
Dortmund offers optimal conditions for this due to its high population density and industrial density: in particular, the coupling of heat and electricity production and the extraction and use of heat from and for production processes in industry.
Projects such as the conversion of the Dortmund heating supply to decentralised heating networks (“Innovative Quartierslösungen Nahwärme”) initiated by DEW21 are heading in the right direction and must be continued.
The conversion of the district heating from steam to hot water by DEW21 also aims to create a heat network.
This will save 45,000 tonnes of CO2 per year.
The electricity supply of the future should no longer be in the hands of just a few large companies, but should consist of many small electricity producers.
Citizens’ and energy cooperatives will become the energy producers of the future and bring the added value into the city.
100% DEW21 in municipal hands.
We want the municipal This time, even indefinitely, DEW21 is involved.
The current deal between RWE and EON allows the "Change-of-Control-Clause" (clause for special termination) to be applied due to the change of ownership of the RWE shares.
This possibly offers the last opportunity for the city to take over the shares of the listed partner.
Dortmund is envied by other cities for this unique opportunity to re-municipalise the energy supply.
A public debate must be held about the future of DEW21.
The participation of Dortmunders in the energy supply.
We want to actively promote the expansion of renewable energy on a decentralised basis with the participation of citizen energy companies and energy cooperatives, bringing together climate protection and regional value creation.
We want to fight for the unbureaucratic possibility of electricity models for tenants.
We also fight for the necessary legal changes at the federal level to make the implementation of such models easier.
We also need a fundamental strengthening of wind energy.
Dortmund is a densely populated city.
Due to the new distance regulations of the black-yellow state government, there are only a few areas locally where the construction of wind That is why we want to reserve public potential areas for the expansion of wind energy with the participation of citizens and to specifically support projects that could arise on already sealed areas (waste sites, spoil heaps, landfills).
The same applies to projects on infrastructure areas as well as in commercial and industrial areas.
Investing public funds in companies that act sustainably Dortmund should no longer receive profits from climate-damaging financial investments.
That is why we, the Greens, demand that the administration and municipal subsidiaries only invest public funds in companies that focus on sustainable and climate-friendly energy generation and feel committed to basic ethical minimum standards (divestment).
Dortmund is committed to environmentally friendly energy generation, sustainability and climate protection with its Climate and Air 2030 action programme.
This also includes the financial investments and participations of the city and its subsidiaries.
Against this background, we demand the sale of RWE shares and the withdrawal from the STEAG participation.
CONSISTENT CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION!
3.1 Protecting nature and species Biological diversity and the creation of Especially in the districts where people with low incomes live, where the density is greater, investments must be made in the construction and maintenance of green spaces.
This social aspect must be taken into account in the implementation.
This requires not only further, intensified activities in Dortmund nature conservation, but also the definition of more forest and green spaces in the land use plan.
Effective concepts for climate adaptation Heavy rain, flooded streets as well as extreme drought and increasingly extreme high temperatures: climate change has long since reached Dortmund.
For the district of Hörde, a concept with various measures for climate adaptation was therefore decided.
Such concepts must be developed for all other districts and implemented as quickly as possible.
Clean air for all Fine dust leads to numerous premature deaths every year and can lead to allergies and lung diseases.
Compliance with the EU fine dust limit values is not only a matter of environmental protection, but also a matter of social justice, as people with low incomes often live in particularly affected areas.
We fight against any kind of health-damaging and carcinogenic emissions.
To this end, we demand more green spaces in the inner city area and more consistent tree protection against construction measures.
Further measures include the introduction of environmental lanes and speed limits, as well as consistent promotion of public transport, cycling and walking.
In the road space, we need more green islands instead of sealed surfaces, in order to adapt Dortmund to the requirements of climate change.
We need more facade and roof greening and more plants instead of parking spaces.
Green streets have been proven to contribute to cooling in hot summers and provide clean air.
Therefore, we want to start a tree planting offensive and plant 5,000 new trees.
The preservation of settlement-related open spaces Open spaces serve not only as a recreational space for people, but are also important habitats for animals and plants.
The preservation of open spaces such as Wickede-West or Rhader Hof is an important soft location factor for the economic development and quality of life in the city.
Additional building areas should therefore be realized on previously used fallow land.
Natural open spaces should be usable for people and as recreational spaces, as far as possible within walking distance.
The networking and expansion of our green zones For this, we will drive forward the protection of coherent open spaces and maintain and strengthen the biotope network.
This also includes reserving areas for nature conservation in the new landscape plan and leaving part of the areas to themselves.
Corridors between the A 3.
NATURE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION The quality of life in our city is heavily dependent on our environment.
That is why we GREENS are committed to the development and preservation of green spaces, natural and natural habitats in the city area and the natural design of watercourses.
In this way we create the foundations to slow down and stop the extinction of species in the urban area.
We ensure the protection of people from noise and harmful substances and we have the protection of the climate in mind.
Climate change is continuing to progress, even if the 1.5 degree target of the Paris Climate Agreement is achieved.
That is why we demand climate protection measures as well as good climate adaptation concepts.
We are fighting together with the initiatives against the further construction of OW III a/L 663 n, a bypass road through an area between Kurl, Brackel, Asseln and Wickede, which the new landscape plan of the city of Dortmund designates as particularly worthy of preservation, because Nature reserves must also be spatially defined in a binding manner and also included as nature reserves in the landscape plan.
The protection of wild animals must be anchored in the landscape plan.
At the request of the GREENS, the development of a biodiversity strategy was decided for Dortmund.
With this, we want to drive forward the goals of the "Municipalities for Biological Diversity", of which Dortmund is a founding member.
In view of the massive decline in insects and the resulting decline in the variety of birds, effective measures must be taken immediately to use more areas in a nature-friendly manner.
This includes, among other things, the complete renunciation of pesticides, the preservation of hedges, natural stone walls and trees, as well as the new construction of small bodies of water.
The ban on glyphosate on urban areas and the decision against gravel gardens in new building areas - both GREEN successes - are a start.
However, the topic must also be given greater consideration in the landscape plan, which is currently being newly established.
The demand for an ecological green space concept We want to promote the species diversity of flora and This includes not only the preservation and expansion of contiguous green spaces and diverse wildflower meadows, but also more orchards and natural parks.
We want to enter into a dialogue with private garden owners and the Dortmunder Gartenvereine e.V.
city association and, in cooperation with the environmental department, offer advice on ecological garden design.
A 3.2 Nature conservation is climate protection Our goals are the preservation and expansion of nature and landscape conservation areas, as well as more green spaces in the city through many different measures: green islands in the streets, on buildings and in courtyards, green roofs and parking spaces in commercial areas, facade greening and more trees in the streets.
Preservation and expansion of existing fresh air corridors The heat waves of recent years have shown how important good ventilation of the city is.
Dense development, sealed surfaces, a lack of greenery and exhaust fumes or waste heat increase the pollutants in the air.
Cold air generation areas and fresh air corridors are therefore particularly important for the city climate and the health of the people.
The preservation of ventilation corridors must therefore be given greater consideration in building projects More trees for our city The planting of location-appropriate and climate-adaptable deciduous trees is an effective measure for the greening of streets and municipal green spaces.
Trees provide shade, offer nesting sites for birds and, through their ability to bind CO2, make a decisive contribution to improving the climate.
That is why we want to increase the number of trees in the city centre.
In the future, significantly more trees are to be accommodated through the redesign of the road space and additional locations for tree discs.
Green roofs, facades and gardens are to be promoted.
Green spaces are to be planned not only in heat islands on roofs, but in all areas of the city, including commercial areas.
We want to convince homeowners with an information campaign of the energy-saving and climate-protecting greening of the roofs or facades of their houses.
Green roofs are to become mandatory in principle in the sense of climate adaptation in all new buildings, in order to ensure better infiltration of rainwater and to improve the microclimate.
More nature education initiatives Especially children and young people are to be able to experience nature on their door We support initiatives that want to turn unused places into gardens for citizens.
Advice on possible areas and support for citizens in coordinating and setting up community gardens and urban gardening projects should be part of neighbourhood management.
We are committed to the return of vegetable gardens to the city, which is why we support projects such as the Westgarten in the Unionviertel and permaculture systems such as the UmweltKulturpark in Dortmund-Barop.
This also includes the promotion of small-scale agricultural areas such as solidarity farming (Solawi), allotment gardens and gravel land.
The greening of industrial areas and business premises offers great potential for ecological upgrading.
By creating a natural design for the company premises, areas with a high quality of stay for employees can be created, and the urban climate can be improved.
Additional tree and hedge planting can filter air pollutants, insect-friendly lighting can minimise light pollution, and facade greening can reduce energy consumption.
The creation of green corridors within industrial areas also offers the possibility of integrating the corresponding measures into an overall city greening concept.
Companies that We want to support the upgrading of rainwater infiltration.
You can be relieved of the costs for the sewage fee.
A business area manager located in the environmental department can advise companies on the possibilities of change towards sustainability, as well as develop solutions together with the specialist departments of the administration.
Sustainable forestry The drought summers of the last two years have severely damaged the forest.
The conversion of the forest into a domestic mixed forest must be driven forward as quickly as possible in order to react to climate change.
Forestry is very long-term, which is why there must be immediate and comprehensive precautionary measures against the increasing risk of drought damage, forest fires, storms and insect damage, so that Dortmunders can continue to benefit from their forests in the future.
In order to promote the biological diversity in the forest, the area on which dead wood is left as a habitat for countless insects and fungi in the forest must be expanded.
The "wilderness proportion" in the municipal forest must therefore be increased to at least 10 percent.
In this sense, the forest management concept of the city from 1993 must The remaining areas must be preserved for reasons of landscape conservation and local food supply.
The city, as the lessee of the majority of agricultural land, must promote the conversion to organic farming with long-term lease agreements.
However, even now, field borders must become obligatory as ecologically managed buffer zones, especially in the outskirts of nature reserves.
Agricultural land use must not be seen as an interim solution on the way to residential and commercial development.
It is an important part of regional food production and supply.
We are committed to marketing products regionally, for example, at the Dortmund weekly markets.
We also want to promote regional distribution structures such as the Ökonetzwerk Dortmund or nutrition councils.
3.3 Environmental protection for everyone Environmental protection to get involved in The environment in which we live is influenced by our behavior.
Whether water quality, noise and air pollution or the increasing (plastic) waste: Every person influences their environment, but politics must create the necessary framework conditions to live in an environmentally conscious way.
In order to create an easy entry for all citizens, we want to make Dortmund an “edible city”.
From This promotes the participation of citizens and creates easy access for everyone to fresh, regional and healthy food.
Protecting clean water According to the Federal Environmental Agency, heavy metals, medication residues and microplastics are increasingly entering our rivers and waterways via municipal wastewater.
The drinking water in Dortmund has a very good quality, and this must also be ensured for the wastewater.
We are committed to better education of farmers and consumers in the interests of the precautionary principle.
The introduction of the 4th cleaning stage should take place in all urban sewage treatment plants.
In cooperation with the Emschergenossenschaft, we are calling for more controls for the renaturated streams in order to combat illegal wastewater discharges.
Reducing waste in the city We are producing more and more waste, not only globally, but also in Dortmund.
The city does not recognise the problem and has long been in default of a concept for city-wide deposit systems.
All future large-scale facilities in Dortmund should work with reusable systems and large-scale events in which the city is CONSISTENTLY INVOLVED IN CLIMATE We also want to introduce a deposit system for coffee-to-go cups in the city.
We also want to offer a regular free bulky waste collection service, so that less rubbish is disposed of illegally in the city or in nature.
This has been repeatedly rejected by the majority in the council.
Deposit rings and boxes and the installation of more ashtrays for cigarette butts are additional measures.
Another problem is food waste.
For this reason, we want to work with the city's businesses to achieve the goal of not wasting food and to enter into cooperations, such as with Foodsharing or the Dortmunder Tafel.
Reduction of fireworks and expansion of fireworks-free zones Dortmund has already declared areas at the main train station and on Westenhellweg as a fireworks-free zone on New Year's Eve to increase safety for visitors to the Dortmund city centre.
We are campaigning for the expansion of these zones.
In total, fewer fireworks are to take place in future, both for the sake of animal welfare and to reduce CO2 and fine dust pollution.
Since 2002, animal welfare has been a state goal in the Basic Law.
Nevertheless, animal welfare often plays a secondary role in local politics.
This was also shown in the long-standing discussion about a cat protection ordinance, which has now been introduced thanks to the persistence of animal and cat protection associations with our support.
We want to protect livestock as well as wild and domestic animals in Dortmund.
Save the insects - protect their habitat The habitat of wild animals, especially birds and insects, is becoming smaller and smaller in Dortmund.
Even in Dortmund, animal and plant species have already declined significantly in their population.
Insects are particularly affected by this decline.
This decline is accompanied by the decline of flowering meadows and other natural habitats that insects need for food and reproduction.
This also affects all insectivores, especially many bird species.
This decline is a loss of our quality of life and a concrete danger for our future.
We are committed to stopping the decline of species with suitable measures.
In urban areas, we want to strengthen bird- and insect-friendly gardening.
Bright lighting harms many animal and insect species.
We want to reduce bright neon advertising and the lighting of buildings and introduce insect-friendly street lighting that ensures sufficient lighting of pedestrian areas while providing maximum protection for insects.
Art conservation advisors Many areas are threatened by construction work, especially by the urgently needed construction of housing.
This leads to further loss of necessary areas for biodiversity.
In the future, we want to involve art conservation advisors in urban planning competitions in order to give due consideration to animal protection when redesigning urban areas.
Dortmunder Zoo In the Dortmunder Zoo, we focus on the humane treatment of all animal species.
As part of the zoo's educational mission, we want to strengthen the commitment to animal welfare, biodiversity and species protection.
Dortmunder Tierschutzzentrum Over 1,000 animals are taken in annually at the Dortmunder Tierschutzzentrum / animal shelter.
Many animals are found They often have no vaccinations or invalid health certificates and must be quarantined for animal disease reasons.
We are committed to ensuring that the animal shelter gets a viable concept that can better respond to the constantly growing challenges such as the increase in animals being given up and the puppy trade.
Wild animals do not belong in the circus ring, because they have particularly high demands on their care and accommodation.
In a circus company, responsible care of wild animals is not possible in principle.
In Germany, elephants, tigers, bears and many other wild animals are still forced to perform questionable circus acts – an untenable situation that other countries have long since changed.
We are committed to municipal regulations so that circuses in Dortmund will only show wildlife-free shows in the future.
No advertising for trophy hunting Legal trophy hunting is a major factor in the decline of certain wildlife species.
We support the concerns of animal welfare organizations to no longer allow providers of trophy hunting at the “Jagd & Hund” trade fair or other trade fair programs in the Westfalenhallen in the future.
Municipal animal welfare officer To further ANIMAL WELFARE Since 2002, animal welfare has been a state objective in the Basic Law.
However, animal welfare often plays a secondary role in local politics.
This was also evident in the long-standing discussion about a cat protection ordinance, which has now been introduced thanks to the persistence of animal and cat protection associations with our support.
We want to strengthen the protection of farm animals, wild animals and pets in Dortmund.
CONSISTENT CLIMATE AND ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION!
B 1.1.
Strengthening a culture of diversity and equal coexistence Establishing a separate office for integration and diversity One of the most important tasks in the coming years is to strengthen a culture of diversity in Dortmund.
Diversity is the strength of a lively, open and democratic city - the diversity of lifestyles, cultures, and different backgrounds.
We are therefore committed to giving this diversity a very strong voice in the administration by creating a separate office for integration and diversity.
The Municipal Integration Centre MIA-DO should also be integrated into such an office as an important actor in the development Transparency, respect and customer orientation should strengthen the advisory character of the authority.
Respect for human dignity must be the highest priority for all applicants and advisors.
The foreigners authority should be converted into a welcome center, in which a culture of welcome is visible.
The main focus of the work should be on individual support and inclusion.
For this purpose, the employees in this area should be continuously trained.
Establishment of a municipal refugee forum We support the demand of the sponsors in Dortmund for the establishment of a municipal refugee forum.
This should institutionalize a permanent dialogue between the foreigners authority and those who are professionally active in refugee aid, in order to develop municipal concepts and measures, such as the lead program.
Recognition and support of voluntary work in refugee aid The projects of voluntary refugee aid have become important building blocks in recent years in the support of refugees.
They provide an indispensable service for the entire city in the gradual integration of many people, in counseling, support and concrete support.
We want to further strengthen these initiatives and work to establish a dialogue between the foreigners authority and volunteers and to intensively support Support for refugees in finding accommodation Since the arrival of many refugees in 2015/16, the municipal tasks for refugees have increased.
PARTICIPATION IN IMMIGRATION SOCIETY: Dortmund is a city of diversity with over 600,000 individual stories.
Young or old, female, male or diverse, born on Borsigplatz or Bosporus, heterosexual or LSBTTIQ, atheist or religious – diversity is our strength.
We see diversity as an enrichment and an opportunity for the further development of our city.
This also includes the diversity through immigration.
The history of Dortmund has always been the history of migration: from the immigration of many people and families from Eastern Europe at the end of the 19th century to the immigration of so-called “guest workers” in the sixties and seventies of the last century to the refugees and immigrants of recent years.
Currently, over a third of the citizens of Dortmund have a migration history.
Many have lived in Dortmund for many decades, many were born here, went to school here, live and work They encountered an overwhelming culture of welcome and the solidarity of many Dortmunders.
Many of the structures built up with great commitment in these years to support refugees still exist today.
GREEN IS...
Diversity and participation for all!
How we want to create equal opportunities and possibilities for all people.
B fundamental change.
Initially, it was about the pure provision of care and accommodation, but today it is about the permanent integration into the Dortmund urban society.
An essential component of integration is, in addition to access to the labor market, the availability of affordable housing.
We are committed to the goal of accommodating as many refugees as possible in their own homes as quickly as possible.
To support this, we want to further strengthen the integration network “lokal willkommen” in the city districts.
If, in exceptional cases, accommodation in communal shelters must be used, the needs of women and other particularly vulnerable groups of people must be taken into account.
Founding a Museum of Migration We will work to ensure that Dortmund gets its own Museum of Migration.
This will document the history of immigration permanently and honour the contribution of immigrants to the development of the city.
Fair distribution of the costs of communal integration tasks Dortmund has long been fulfilling its obligations to refugees.
But: Whether it is the monthly allowances for refugees or the reimbursement of costs for those with temporary residence permits – the federal government and the state have so far only inadequately financed the costs incurred in many places.
We are calling for the federal government and the state to take responsibility for the actual costs incurred.
B 1.2 Protection and help for people without secure residence status Development of a municipal right-to-stay programme More than a thousand people have been living in Dortmund for many years as those with temporary residence permits and thus without secure residence status.
They are formally required to leave the country, but their deportation has been suspended because, for example, it cannot be carried out for humanitarian reasons.
A temporary residence permit is always only granted for a limited period of time and must be renewed.
For Those who have been granted temporary protection have no access to language and integration courses.
We want to create additional opportunities for this at the local level.
We are calling for the administration to consistently use the discretionary powers it has to create permanent residency for as many of those who have been granted temporary protection, their families and children as possible.
In addition, we want to develop a separate municipal residency program to create a residency perspective for those who have been granted temporary protection, including refugees who are former unaccompanied minors in school or vocational training or who already have a job.
The petitions committee and the hardship commission of the state are often the last hope for many people in terms of a residency perspective.
We are calling for the administration to follow positive decisions and requests from the petitions committee and hardship commission.
Improving the legal and social situation for people without papers People without legal residency status are also a part of social reality in Dortmund.
Many of them are rejected asylum seekers, former refugees, international students who have dropped out – people who have lost their right to residency and yet remain.
Some of them are still children.
They all They are not insured, often live in overcrowded and unworthy accommodation and are defenseless against landlords.
Many of them work “under the table” without residence and employment legal protection under unacceptable conditions and wages.
We are committed to improving the situation of the affected people and creating ways out of illegality into secure residence.
Dortmund as a “Safe Haven” for refugees We, the Greens, have fought for Dortmund to declare itself a “Safe Haven” for refugees rescued from the Mediterranean.
The Council passed a corresponding resolution in the summer of 2019.
We want to ensure that the Council’s resolution is implemented and that the additional admission of refugees is carried out within the framework of future national admission programs.
This concerns, for example, the additional admission of unaccompanied minors from refugee camps in southeastern Europe or also Dortmund’s participation in the “NesT – Neustart im Team” (New Start as a Team) admission program.
B 1.3 Promoting the political, social and cultural participation of migrants and people from immigrant They support intercultural dialogue, promote diversity and participation for all!
They promote cohesion and act as a bridge between immigrants and the majority population.
We want to further strengthen the work of the existing MSOs and promote the self-organisation and social participation of new immigrant groups.
This concerns initiatives by refugees or immigrants from South-East Europe, for example.
The House of Diversity already has a centre for the self-organisation of migrants.
We are committed to creating additional space if required.
Strengthening the Integration Council We want to strengthen the Integration Council as a strong community interest group for migrants.
The Integration Council advocates for the cultural, social, legal and political equality of migrants and advises on many aspects of Dortmund's municipal policy.
It is therefore an important support for decisions by committees and the council.
Unfortunately, it only has an advisory function.
We want to strengthen his role in Dortmund's local politics and are fighting for the examination of additional competencies and rights.
The demand for a municipal voting right for all migrants must not be second-class citizens.
However, many immigrants who do not come from the EU are still excluded from local co-determination.
Many of them have been living and working in Dortmund for decades, but cannot participate in the election of a mayor or the composition of the council and district representatives.
For us, equal participation is a basic prerequisite for successful integration.
That is why we are fighting for the municipal voting right of all non-German residents living in Dortmund and will make a strong case for this at the state and federal level.
B 1.4.
Fair participation and social security for all Integrative urban development We want a diverse and open urban society without social and ethnic exclusion.
That is why integration and urban development must go hand in hand for us.
We are fighting for a cross-departmental urban development that promotes city-wide integration and prevents a separation according to ethnicity or income in the city districts.
Culturally sensitive health care and nursing care Social and cultural services for the elderly should always be tailored to the needs of older migrants.
Financial security in old age, the desire to participate and culturally sensitive health care and nursing care in old age must be ensured, especially for older migrants.
We are committed to a social infrastructure that is fair to different life stories.
Program “Survival Aid Migration Southeast Europe” In recent years, many people from Southeast Europe have moved to Dortmund legally as EU citizens.
Almost 3,000 of them are now employed in a social insurance-covered capacity or as low-paid employees.
For many of the newcomers, the search for work and the start of work is still difficult.
The intensive efforts of a differentiated and expert advice service for job search, job acceptance and vocational training are therefore to be intensified.
Since many of the newcomers have neither a claim to social benefits nor health insurance and are largely excluded from integrative aid, some of them are increasingly affected or threatened by poverty and destitution, living in precarious housing conditions or An essential component of such a programme must be medical care.
The existing support structures must be expanded in order to accompany, evaluate and further develop projects.
In addition, we believe that an independent body must be established to acquire funding for the co-financing of projects and programmes by the federal government, the state and the European Union.
This is intended to close gaps that are not covered by the existing support offer.
Offers to improve living conditions must also be created.
Unlike refugees, EU immigrants do not have a legal right to participate in integration courses.
This makes integration more difficult.
The offers for children in day care centres and schools, particularly in the areas of language and integration support, must be further expanded.
We therefore want to create appropriate offers.
We support the efforts to include as many people as possible in the statutory health insurance scheme.
In addition, there must be sufficient offers for those who are not insured.
We are committed to preventing permanent homelessness of immigrants from the outset.
Within the framework of emergency accommodation, joint protected accommodation of families in men's and women's overnight shelters must be possible.
We want to develop and implement the "Boarding House" project, which offers short-term accommodation, social counselling and referral to measures from a single source.
DIVERSITY AND PARTICIPATION FOR EVERYONE!
B 1.5.
Educational justice in the immigration society Increase in funds for municipal educational work Germany has long since become an immigration country.
And in Dortmund, too, immigrants, migrants and refugees have found a new home.
We are committed to opening up personal and professional perspectives for them and thus integrating them into society.
Support for education and qualification is the most important task.
We want to increase the funds for municipal educational work, especially for the support of parental work with immigrants, migrants and refugees.
Tailor-made educational offers for children and young people Even refugee and immigrant children and young people have a right to education.
We are committed to ensuring that these students are taught in regular schools and classes and are supported by tailored support offers in language acquisition and beyond.
The foundation stones for a successful start in Dortmund can already be laid in childcare.
To this end, childcare places must be secured for all children – regardless of their background.
The promotion of multilingualism and heritage languages is an important component.
We are committed to introducing a bilingual stream in a commonly used heritage language in at least one secondary school in each district.
We are committed to ensuring that the foreigners' registration office uses its discretion to grant a residence permit for young refugees in training.
DIVERSITY AND PARTICIPATION FOR EVERYONE!
25B 2.1.
Fair participation in working life More women in leadership positions We are convinced that our society needs the perspectives and life and work experience of women.
Many women work in the administration of the city and in companies with municipal participation; in some areas of work, their proportion is predominant.
But in leadership positions, they are still significantly underrepresented.
We want to encourage and support women to apply for leadership positions.
We want the city to provide specific offers for women, such as mentoring and networking programs.
In order to promote the representation of women in leadership positions, we also demand that at least 50% of the management and supervisory boards of municipal subsidiaries must be filled with women.
Implementation of the principle of “equal pay for equal and equivalent work” For decades, women have earned on average 20% less than men: in 2019, women received €17.72 gross per hour, while men received €22.16.
The main cause of this “gender pay gap” is that women often work in professions and industries that are paid less.
This is mainly due to the valuation of work.
Women-dominated professions in personal social services (nursing, education, care, social work, counseling) are not valued according to their requirements and are therefore not paid fairly.
We demand the upgrading of these professions.
In addition, more programs against gender-stereotypical career choices should be launched in cooperation with the Equal Opportunities Office.
Furthermore Care work is paid less.
Women are less often in leadership positions; but even women in the executive suites are often paid less than their male colleagues.
Equal Pay Day is the international day of action to draw attention to the “gender pay gap”.
In Germany, the day of action symbolically marks the day until which women work without pay.
We support the actions on Equal Pay Day in Dortmund.
At the federal level, we demand an effective equal pay law.
We want to change the framework conditions so that work and family are better reconciled, especially for single mothers.
This includes the further and increased expansion of high-quality full-day childcare and full-day schools.
Good, flexible and reliable childcare and education creates space for professional development.
We are committed to expanding the number of places, especially for children under three years of age, as well as in the open full-day school, so that every child receives a corresponding place if needed.
B 2.2 Against violence against women and girls Supporting the work of the Dortmund women’s shelter Violence against women remains an alarming social problem.
Nationwide, over 140,000 women reported domestic violence in 2018.
At the same time, there are not enough places in women's shelters to ensure protection, accommodation and counselling for affected women and their children.
There is no legal entitlement to protection and assistance, nor is there a nationwide regulation for funding.
The women's shelters and advice centres B 2.
HALF THE POWER TO WOMEN: We are calling for time, power, money and opportunities to be shared fairly between women and men.
We in the GREENS have been practising this in our own structures with quota boards and quotas in our parliamentary groups from the outset.
Half the power to women - this also means upgrading social professions, more women as bosses and a fairer distribution of care work between women and men.
We are saying it clearly: zero tolerance for violence against women and girls!
Violence against women and girls is a constant and major social problem.
To this day, they are primarily the victims of sexualised and domestic violence.
In this context, their own home is often the most We want to fight this violence decisively.
People of different genders also have different living conditions, requirements and needs.
We want the different perspectives of people in all policy areas and within the city administration to be recognized and taken into account under the guiding principles of equality and equal participation for all genders.
For us, the maxim of the General Equal Treatment Act is self-explanatory: no one may be discriminated against on the basis of their gender or their sexual identity.
DIVERSITY AND PARTICIPATION FOR EVERYONE!
are still dependent on voluntary services from the states and municipalities, which makes any planning difficult.
At the federal level, we Greens therefore want to legally anchor a right to protection and help in the event of violence in order to permanently secure the financing and work of the women's shelters.
The Dortmund women's shelter currently has 32 places: 16 each for women and children.
The financing is provided by funds from the state, donations and annual contributions from the city.
At the request of the Greens, an additional 40,000 euros have been made available to ensure that the gate To this end, it must be examined whether funds from the federal government's investment programme can be applied for to renovate the women's shelter.
In addition to accommodation for women, appropriate counselling for further planning is also important.
This also requires multilingual counselling services.
We are committed to expanding and financing these services.
Professional psychosocial counselling requires communication in the mother tongue.
This is why we need staff with a wide range of language skills.
We are committed to securing the funding and further training of honorary staff and interpreters in order to provide adequate support to non-German-speaking residents.
We support initiatives for the conceptual further development of the women's shelter.
This particularly concerns accommodation in safe homes after the time in the women's shelter with intensive support and counselling in order to enable the transition to a self-determined life.
The protection of women, children and staff must be guaranteed.
Many women come to the women's shelter with their children.
We are committed to ensuring that the services provided for the children are continued in a targeted and long-term manner by youth welfare services even after their Boys can only be taken in by their mothers in women's shelters if they are at most 14 years old.
Here, solutions are needed for women with older children.
Intensification of work with perpetrators of domestic violence The project "Real Men Talk" by the SKM (Social Service of Catholic Men) advises men who have become violent towards their partners.
Men can learn to understand the background of their crisis, take responsibility and change their behavior.
We are committed to intensifying the work of the project to protect women.
The police and public prosecutor's office should inform men who are violent about this project during operations and investigations.
B 2.3 Safe and social housing for women Gender-sensitive urban planning We are committed to ensuring that the diversity of our city is also reflected in the design of our neighborhoods and districts.
Urban planning and urban development must specifically take into account the different requirements and interests of different citizens, differentiated according to different living situations, life phases, social and cultural backgrounds.
The basis of gender-sensitive planning culture is the consideration of groups that are tending to be underrepresented in urban planning and in public space.
Promotion of They are more often single parents or affected by poverty than men.
And that is why they and their children are particularly in need of affordable housing.
We are committed to the targeted promotion and support of housing projects for women.
Support for homeless women Women without a home and without financial means can find accommodation at any time at the new women's overnight shelter of the Diaconia in Hörde.
The expansion of places is the response to the increasing demand for accommodation.
However, the stay is limited to six months.
We support all approaches to provide sufficient living space after the stay in the women's overnight shelter.
DIVERSITY AND PARTICIPATION FOR EVERYONE!
B 3.1 Strengthening LSBTTIQ organizations and initiatives Support for SL ADO and Sunrise Whether SLADO as the umbrella organization of the numerous Dortmund gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender and transsexual associations and initiatives, whether the KCR as the lesbian and gay center, whether the health store Pudelwohl or the youth education and counseling center Sunrise - the Dortmund LSBTTIQ landscape is diverse.
For us This is especially true for counseling services for young people.
The Sunrise youth education and counseling center at the Fritz-Henßler-Haus offers a safe space for queer youth and young adults to openly discuss their experiences with their peers.
There are also offers for relatives and educational staff.
We support the further funding of Sunrise by the youth welfare office.
Funding for the SCHL AU anti-discrimination project The SCHLAU project, which is carried out by SLADO, is an anti-discrimination project that deals with the sexual and gender diversity of young people.
The project takes place in schools and youth centers.
The respective workshops on site are carried out by volunteers.
In order to be able to handle the many inquiries and the number of workshops carried out, the existing structures are no longer sufficient.
On the application of the GRÜNE Ratsfraktion, the council decided to subsidize the SCHLAU project with 70,000 euros each for the years 2020 and 2021.
We are committed to making this funding permanent Celebrating Christopher Street Day At the Christopher Street Day events and demonstrations, thousands of people in Dortmund are making their sexual and gender diversity and their demands visible.
We Greens will continue to support the CSD and Trans*CSD events.
B 3.2 Promoting equal coexistence Further development of the “Round Table” and “Coordination Office for Lesbians, Gays and Transgender People” For many years, there has been a “Round Table” in Dortmund to promote the emancipation and acceptance of lesbians, gays and transgender people, as well as a municipal coordination office.
It takes care of the concerns of LSBTTIQ employees in the administration and is the link between the administration and the community.
We are committed to continuing and further developing the “Round Table” and the coordination office in the coming years.
Development of an action plan for acceptance of sexual and gender diversity Many LSBTTIQ experience discrimination on the basis of their sexual orientation or gender identity, up to physical attacks.
We are therefore committed to the city developing an action plan for acceptance of sexual and gender diversity.
The action plan should “Diverse living spaces” in retirement homes The Zehnthof residential and community centre of the municipal retirement homes is the first Dortmund retirement home to provide particularly good conditions for LSBTTIQ residents.
It is the first of its kind in NRW and has been awarded the “Diverse living spaces” quality seal by the Berlin gay counselling service.
This seal is awarded to facilities that provide particularly good conditions for sexual and gender minorities and that promote sexual and gender diversity.
LSBTTIQ PEOPLE Dortmund is an open city with a diverse population.
This includes the recognition of every sexual identity and sexual orientation.
We want to prevent discrimination in all areas and eliminate existing discrimination.
Gender diversity can be lived; lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual, transgender, intersexual and queer people (LSBTTIQ) are part of our diverse city.
We stand for a (city) society in which all people can be different without fear and live their differences with self-awareness and self-determination.
Residents* as an essential aspect of their personality.
We are committed to supporting other facilities for senior People must flee because of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
They are often exposed to multiple forms of discrimination because of their origin.
We are calling for additional support services.
DIVERSITY AND PARTICIPATION FOR EVERYONE!
Inclusion in the labor market An important aspect of social participation is inclusion in the labor market.
The ideal would be an inclusive primary labor market, so that no workshops for people with disabilities and no social labor market are needed.
We want to set an example for an inclusive labor market that also offers opportunities to people with severe health impairments.
We welcome and support the establishment of inclusive businesses or departments for integration.
Guaranteeing mobility Mobility is a basic prerequisite for participation in community life.
In the past, we Greens have repeatedly brought the introduction of an accompanying service for bus and train journeys into the political discussion.
Such a service is aimed at passengers who use a wheelchair, rollator or walking aid, people with visual impairments, the blind or deaf, as well as passengers who feel insecure when using public transport.
We will continue to work towards such an offer to ensure the mobility of many people in Dortmund.
We will also continue to work towards a well-functioning transport service for people with disabilities.
The transport service must ensure the participation of people with particularly severe mobility impairments.
We have worked alongside the Behindertenpolitisches Netzwerk (Disability Policy Network) to oppose a simultaneous reduction in funds during the redesign of the transport service for people with disabilities.
We will critically observe whether the revised transport service meets the increased and continuously increasing demands and will make improvements if necessary.
Expansion of public toilets In order to ensure mobility and equal participation in social life, barrier-free and high-quality public toilets are of great importance, especially for people with disabilities.
At present, there is one toilet per district – this is not enough.
We are advocating for a concept for the expansion of public toilets and for the city-wide implementation of the “Nette Toilette” project.
Inclusive city events We are advocating for city events to be inclusive in principle.
City facilities must be equipped with or retrofitted with inductive The presence of sign language interpreters must also be ensured if required.
Offers for people with a migration background and disabilities Families with a migration background and disabled members usually have to deal with a double challenge and often have inadequate access to support systems.
The demand for advice and support is high and increasing.
We therefore support the advice and contact centre for people with a migration background and disabilities as the first point of contact for encounters, information and assistance.
PARTICIPATION AND INVOLVEMENT FOR EVERYONE: The participation of all people in society is at the heart of our political actions for the Greens.
Inclusion is a human right that is still too often denied to many people.
According to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, disability is seen as an individual impairment that only becomes a disability through psychosocial factors and social and spatial barriers.
This is something that people with disabilities experience every day when there are no lifts at train stations, when the real costs for sign language interpreters are not covered or when the nursery or school is not barrier-free.
We are committed to a barrier-free public space in which buildings And despite all the progress and efforts: Dortmund is still at the beginning of the development of an inclusive city.
That is why we want to think and plan inclusive needs in all policy areas from the beginning.
Important supporters are the disability policy network and the inclusion council.
We want to integrate their expertise even better into the work of the council and district representatives as well as the administration.
Ensuring cultural participation When planning the program of the municipal cultural institutions, more attention should be paid to the fact that the institutions are increasingly open to people with a migration background and they are thus won as visitors.
This can be done, for example, through multilingual event calendars, bilingual readings, puppet shows, etc.
In order to enable unrestricted use of Dortmund's cultural institutions also for people with disabilities, we consider a comprehensive concept for barrier-free access to be necessary.
Culture should take place in all districts and not be limited to the city center.
Non-profit associations ensure that cultural participation is not tied to a certain income.
Places like the Kulturhaus Lütgendortmund, Balou, the Güntherstraße music and culture centre and many others make a valuable contribution to the city's society.
We want to support existing and new associations, especially in the search for premises.
We want to better support sociocultural centres structurally, as they are the ones who implement the principle of "culture for all" and make participation possible for everyone.
And we are fighting for the introduction of a "Kombiticket Kultur", which allows free use of public transport to attend events at all Dortmund cultural institutions.
Strengthening the free cultural scene We Greens will continue to fight for a diverse, varied and contemporary orientation of Dortmund's cultural scene.
In addition to a lively art scene with exhibition, concert, studio and event spaces, festivals, gastronomy and a club and pub scene are also part of a municipal culture in a city of our size.
A consultation and support offer should be created at the city to actively support smaller initiatives or individual cultural workers in finding spaces, especially for interim use, or in planning events, in order We support the temporary use of public space for cultural events.
We want to support and secure the future of children's and youth offers such as the art courses of the Museum Ostwall or other museums for children and young people or the children's museum mondo mio, which enable intercultural exploration and already offer children an important contribution to a better understanding of different cultures.
We also want to preserve and promote the Dortmund Philharmonic's family concerts, concerts for young people and the sitting concerts, as well as the family concerts of the Domicil.
We want to strengthen and expand cooperation between cultural institutions in order to create creative spaces for artistic participation.
One effect of the Ruhr Capital of Culture 2010 is the cooperation between art museums and publicly funded cultural institutions.
VARIETY AND PARTICIPATION FOR EVERYONE!
Culture and art sustainably shape the face of a city.
Cultural policy means for us GREENS in the first instance the securing of the cultural infrastructure and variety in the districts for all citizens.
In particular, the special challenges of inclusion and integration must be taken into account.
Es Culture is a community asset, whose infrastructure is largely publicly funded – and that must remain the case.
Dortmund has a diverse landscape of established cultural institutions.
In addition to the so-called high culture, there is a strong free cultural scene as well as diverse socio-cultural and intercultural facilities.
Our goal is to maintain these offers and promote cooperation.
It is the non-institutionalised art and cultural scene that is particularly close to our hearts.
Here we demand more spaces for free design as well as for network and local work, in order to give people on the ground more opportunities for individual and lively development.
Stages in the Ruhr area and the introduction of a RuhrKul - tur.Card.
The cooperations are part of the regional cultural planning on the part of the RVR and the Kultur Ruhr GmbH.
We support this form of cooperation between cultural institutions in the region and are calling for an expansion to other cultural areas.
Promotion of free access to museums The municipal museums are places of remembrance, public urban space and at the same time extra-curricular educational institutions.
Admission to most museums is now free of charge.
This is something that should remain the same.
We, the GRÜ - NE, are committed to stronger year-round networking of museum facilities and their offerings, as well as broader joint public relations work.
Learning includes cultural learning at all stages of life.
Against this background, cooperation between museums and schools and educational institutions for adults should be intensified.
Preservation of libraries and bookstores Libraries and bookstores are important for education and help ensure that all people, regardless of their educational background and income, have access to a broad range of literature.
In addition to the city and state library in the city center, there are local lending stations in the neighborhoods.
These must be increasingly promoted and expanded into additional city districts.
We want libraries to continue to develop with regard to changing user behavior and the possibilities of digitization, so that they can continue to meet the requirements of basic education.
In order to enable all people to access education, we demand free use of all libraries for Dortmund citizens.
More freedom for a lively night culture Dortmund is one of the few cities that still adhere to the curfew.
However, there are also more and more clubs, labels and public cultural institutions here that implement experimental The curfew is not intended to protect against noise, because clubs must in any case adhere to the noise emission limits laid down in environmental law.
We want Dortmund to develop a creative, diverse and lively (night) culture with young people.
The abolition of the curfew is an essential part of this.
Preservation and promotion of the culture of remembrance Dortmund has a lively and diverse movement against the right.
This also includes keeping alive the memory of the victims of right-wing extremist violence and Nazi crimes.
Examples of this are the Stolpersteine and, in particular, the work of the Gedenkstätte Steinwache.
The Steinwache, as the former Gestapo prison, or the memorial for forced labourers at the Phoenix See are places in Dortmund that still make the Nazi crimes comprehensible today.
These projects are more important than ever, as right-wing extremist crimes are still shaking our society.
The establishment of a “Mehmet-Kubaşık-Platz” in Nordstadt serves as a permanent and warning reminder of current acts with a national socialist background.
We Greens are committed to prom 59 percent of sporting activity is organised privately in Dortmund, which is why we want to improve the opportunities for the many non-organised leisure-time sportspeople.
Offers for amateur sports must become an equal component in the “Masterplan Sport” and general urban development.
We are advocating for more free spaces to be made available for sport, play and leisure.
Sports halls and facilities must also be made available for non-club activities.
We want a concept that ensures the widest possible access to our sports facilities for everyone.
Renovation and expansion of sports facilities We will continue to advocate for intact and attractive sports facilities.
We want to achieve this above all through the renovation of existing sports halls and pitches.
We want sports facilities to be multifunctional in future: for different sports and for different generations.
The 300 million euros in funding for the whole of NRW, which has been provided by the state as part of the “Modern Sports Facility 2022” renovation programme, is not enough for this.
At state level, we are advocating for schools and sports not to have to compete for already The sports allowance and the school allowance must be listed as separate pots in the municipal financing act.
Sports facilities belong in the residential environment, because proximity to home is the decisive criterion for the use of sports and exercise facilities.
We are therefore advocating comprehensive protection of existing facilities and the expansion of open sports facilities.
Intensive cooperation between schools and sports clubs The introduction of open-ended school hours at more and more schools means that increasing cooperation with sports clubs is necessary.
Every school should have at least one sports club as a cooperation partner.
We are advocating fair compensation for club instructors and the communal strengthening of voluntary commitment at the state level.
This also applies to kindergartens.
Fewer and fewer children can swim.
We are therefore calling for more teaching pools for young children, especially in the vicinity of kindergartens and school centers.
The use of such pools for rehabilitation sports also ensures the profitability of these additional pools.
We want to promote the cooperation of schools, kindergartens and swimming clubs for more water acclimatization and swimming lessons in kindergartens and schools.
In cooperation with the city sports association, additional school swimming teachers must be financed to ensure the necessary supervision.
Implementation of inclusion in sport People with disabilities must have equal access to sport.
Therefore, we Greens want to further develop inclusive sports offers and adapt them to the special requirements of people with disabilities.
This includes barrier-free changing rooms, sanitary facilities, play and sports areas.
In selected halls, basic sports equipment for people with disabilities, such as sports wheelchairs, should be available.
The clubs are already doing valuable work here.
We want to support them in implementing more inclusive projects.
B 6.
LIVING TOGETHER IN MOTION: Sport and exercise are important aspects of our social coexistence and an expression of a lively and diverse society.
Swimming pools, gymnasiums, ball courts and other sports facilities are part of the municipal public welfare.
In Germany, 80 percent of sports promotion is carried out by the municipalities.
In order to be able to shape the local infrastructure for movement in a sustainable way, the municipalities need more support from the federal government and the states.
Because sports development is facing many challenges such as changes in sports behavior, school policy developments, demographic change, inclusion and a noticeable backlog in the renovation of sports facilities.
With a “Master Plan for Sport”, the city wants to prepare for these new circumstances.
We want to contribute our ideas for sport to this process.
We Greens are committed to more sport and exercise – in clubs or self-organized, in amateur or professional sports.
We are committed to the social dimensions of sport such as the inclusion of people with disabilities, the integration of immigrants and the joint participation of generations and different types of diversity in sport is important to us: That is why sport must be sustainably supported at all levels.
It needs not only intact sports facilities but also a transport and urban policy that is friendly to sport and exercise as well as the expansion of civic engagement.
Sports halls are not the only places where sport is practiced.
We want to take To achieve this, we need to work with the City Sports Association to train more qualified instructors.
Cooperation between clubs offers the opportunity to jointly provide services and share instructors.
Sport teaches values such as fairness, tolerance and respect and can help to reduce prejudice.
In particular, sports clubs make a major contribution to this.
We therefore support projects that are directed against racism, discrimination and violence in sport, such as district-based events and tournaments that invite all children, regardless of their background and sporting ability.
In addition, we are committed to ensuring that the city develops new projects that promote fairness and a sense of togetherness in sport for young people in the field of amateur sport.
We support the work of the Fan Project Dortmund.
This makes an important contribution to democracy and human rights for the entire city, for example through political youth education at the stadium and through intercultural football tournaments for children and young people, as well as visits to Nazi memorials.
Motion-oriented public spaces Sport and exercise take place throughout the urban area.
Spaces that were not built explicitly for sporting activities, such as parks, streets and paths, play a major role.
Children and young people, but also adults, must be able to meet, play, frolic, climb and relax in the fresh air.
We want to identify suitable locations for this, with the participation of users and taking into account climatic changes.
Skate parks, ball courts, boules courts and basketball courts are just as much a part of the design of public spaces for us as sports equipment for seniors.
We are therefore focusing on a motion-oriented infrastructure when planning new districts.
In the course of the redesign of our urban parks, we are working to improve the opportunities for leisure sports, e.
g.
This includes illuminated jogging tracks or open mini-playing fields.
And we want all sports facilities to be quickly and safely accessible by bike.
Action plan against right-wing extremism The action plan against right-wing extremism, which was first created 10 years ago at the request of the GREENS, is a success.
Its seven areas of action are the basis for the city's activities against right-wing extremism and right-wing populism.
Over the years, this has led to numerous activities by the city's society for diversity and democracy.
In addition, new counselling centres and support services against the right have been created.
We are committed to continuously developing the action plan.
Our goal is to support and promote as many groups and projects in the city as possible in their efforts for diversity and democracy.
We want to expand the public relations for the action plan.
The funds required for this must be made available in the coming years and expanded if necessary.
Strengthening the Coordination Office for Diversity, Tolerance and Democracy The municipal Coordination Office for Diversity, Tolerance and Democracy - against right-wing extremism, xenophobia and anti-Semitism - activates, advises, builds and networks civil society engagement for democracy and tolerance.
In addition, it develops participatory strategies for action based on the action plan against right-wing extremism.
We demand that the work of the Coordination Office be further strengthened, especially the function of networking activities in the sense of the action plan.
Supporting the Exit and Victim Advice We support the Exit and Victim Advice BackUp-ComeBack.
Their project U-Turn accompanies, advises and supports people who want to leave the right-wing extremist scene and develops new life perspectives together with them.
BackUp offers advice for victims of right-wing violence, their friends and relatives and supports them with legal, financial and psychological questions.
We will permanently secure the financial support of the advice centres.
Networking of civil society initiatives and actors against the right In Dortmund, various working groups and alliances are committed We are actively committed to better networking of the alliances in order to strengthen the resistance against the right-wing extremist scene and its actions.
In various districts, organizations, clubs, churches and individuals have come together to form round tables against the right.
We support these approaches to take action against right-wing extremism directly on site and to work together on concepts for diversity and democracy.
We are committed to founding round tables of this kind in as many districts as possible and to support and network them through the coordination office.
Resistance against Nazi marches The great resistance of the city society in autumn 2019 against the weekly marches of the Dortmund Nazis has led to a decrease in the number of larger right-wing extremist actions in the following months.
We want to prevent marches and actions of the Nazis with all legal means.
We support the resistance against them with non-violent actions, especially with sit-ins.
We welcome it when the police and justice system consistently prosecute and convict violent Nazis.
However, we also demand that counter-demonstrators be protected and that their demonstrations are not unreasonably hindered.
B 7 Dortmund is not a Nazi stronghold.
But Dortmund still has a violent Nazi scene that is networked nationally and internationally and works locally with intimidation, threats and attacks.
Even their involvement in the planning of the murder of Mehmet Kubaşık by the NSU has still not been conclusively clarified.
On the contrary, right-wing extremists continue to murder.
This is shown by the examples in Halle, Kassel and Hanau.
Many people also experience racism, anti-Semitism and devaluation in our city on a daily basis.
The right-wing populists of the AfD and right-wing extremist parties in parliaments, including in the council of the city of Dortmund, prepare the ground for this.
Under the guise of freedom of opinion, they try to shift the limits of what can be said to the right.
We Greens are standing up to all of this with a clear commitment against racism and anti-Semitism and for diversity and democracy.
Full clarification of the NSU support structures.
Unforgettable: One of our fellow citizens, Mehmet Kubaşık, was murdered To this day, many of the connections surrounding this murder are still unclear, as are those surrounding the murders in other cities.
It is also unclear whether and how many accomplices the NSU had in its murder in Dortmund.
There are many indications that there were accomplices and that they are still among us.
The previous NSU trial was therefore not the end of the matter.
Instead, we demand a thorough investigation of the NSU terror and the uncovering of the connections with the Nazi scene in Dortmund.
Combating institutional racism Institutional racism means the systematic degradation and disadvantage of social groups in organizations, institutions and authorities.
Institutional racism is often denied or played down, but those affected experience racism and discrimination on a daily basis.
For us Greens, it is therefore necessary to have a broad discussion in politics and society about institutional racism.
At a local level, we are committed to ensuring that concepts for raising awareness and training employees in local government are developed and implemented.
The state is also required to anchor the topic in the training and further education of police officers.
Consistent rejection of cooperation with the AfD The AfD is a right-wing populist party, whose boundaries with right-wing extremism are fluid.
For years, many of its members have been agitating against refugees, migrants and people of colour and relativizing National Socialism and its crimes.
The AfD is one of the intellectual pioneers for the countless attacks on refugees and immigrants and ultimately also for the murders in Halle, Kassel and Hanau.
In the council and committees, the AfD's dominant theme is always the agitation against refugees in Dortmund.
At the same time, they want to cut funding for everything that makes up an open, free, pluralistic and democratic city society.
We not only strongly oppose this climate of intimidation and exclusion.
We reject cooperation with the AfD in any form and demand this also from the other democratic parties in Dortmund.
C 1.1 Housing must be affordable Dortmund is growing.
The population has increased by around 13,300 Despite many new buildings, the housing market is not keeping up with this steady growth.
As a result, living costs are rising and living space for people with low and average incomes has become scarce.
The average net cold rent has risen by a total of 20 percent to currently 7.00 €/sqm (2019) on average.
In 2019, the average value for newly built apartments was already 10.50 €/sqm.
Only 7.5 percent of the total Dortmund housing stock were subsidized apartments in 2018 - and the trend is still declining.
More and more households looking for affordable housing are therefore facing a dwindling supply of social housing: At the end of 2018, the Housing Office had already put around 2,000 households on the waiting list who could not be provided with a suitable subsidized apartment.
All Dortmunders* should be able to find and afford a good home.
This also means that the rent should not exceed 30 percent of the available income for the average household.
Enough affordable and barrier-free housing must be available As of April 2014, there is a regulation that stipulates that at least 25 percent of the new residential units in any building area must be publicly subsidized rental apartments.
This quota is no longer sufficient due to the increasing demand and the growing population, and it must be adjusted to the new developments and increased to at least 40 percent.
There are many people in Dortmund with low or middle incomes who cannot afford the average new rent of €10.50/sqm in Dortmund.
In addition, at least 10 percent of the apartments in each new building area should be so-called price-damped.
HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT A country and a city are only social if they enable self-determined participation for all and effectively protect their citizens from poverty.
This is our GREEN claim.
We stand for an inclusive society and city in which everyone belongs and no one is excluded.
However, the reality in Dortmund is different.
In February of this year, over 33,000 people were registered as unemployed, and the unemployment 90,000 people in so-called needy communities and receive benefits under SGB II (Hartz IV) or social assistance – among them many children and single parents.
In addition, there are around 15,000 so-called toppers who cannot live off their earnings and receive supplementary social benefits.
The legal minimum wage has changed little in this situation, because it is too low to make people independent of transfer payments; this applies in particular to families with several children.
And: More and more people in Dortmund are dependent on state support in addition to their retirement benefits.
The number of recipients of basic security in old age rose by 43 percent within ten years and is now also around 15,000 people.
Dortmund is therefore one of the ten regions with the highest poverty rate according to the figures of the Paritätischer Wohlfahrtsverband: In Dortmund, it is constantly at just under 20%.
The 2018 Social Report considers the social situation in Dortmund according to criteria such as income level, children’s educational opportunities, participation in the labor market, housing situation, health and makes it clear: Social The one cannot be separated from the other.
Whether in childcare and school policy, in politics for the elderly, in labor market policy or in affordable housing – there are proposals in many places in our program to improve the situation of many people in Dortmund.
GREEN IS...
Social justice!
How we want to strengthen social cohesion, fairness and togetherness.
C ten segment, i.e.
with square meter prices between social rent and asking rent, should be offered.
This must be secured via a town planning contract.
Our colorful neighborhoods must remain!
As housing shortages increase, there is a growing building upgrade of mostly inner-city residential areas.
This is a positive process as long as it does not lead to the displacement of long-term tenants with low incomes by a new, financially strong population and the district completely changes its social structure.
We want to protect our colorful neighborhoods from displacement with neighborhood protection ordinances (social preservation ordinances).
We want to actively use the instruments such as the right of first refusal to prevent speculative sales.
In addition, luxury renovations should be prevented and we demand that the state government can also prohibit The majority of buildings in Dortmund, especially residential buildings, are in private hands.
For many people, heating costs are a huge burden.
These can be significantly reduced through energy-efficient renovation.
At the same time, such renovation does a lot for climate protection.
We do not want the costs to be financed solely by the tenants through a surcharge, but rather to be cushioned by additional municipal subsidies.
A corresponding municipal support programme also creates an additional investment incentive.
For the tenants of the municipal housing company DOGEWO21, rent increases due to energy-efficient modernisation and the resulting energy savings should be financially compensated.
Increased construction of subsidised housing by DOGEWO21 or the Dortmund City Development Company (DSG) Wohnen is a basic right and part of the city's public duty.
The city's own housing company must ensure that it eases the housing market.
This is achieved by the increased construction of subsidised housing by the city.
DOGEWO21 must be held accountable for this.
This also includes the strategic acquisition of housing stocks.
DOGEWO21 should develop into a socially oriented, municipal company in the future.
Mistakes from the past - such as the sale of Hannibal 2 in Dorstfeld - must not be repeated, which is why DOGEWO21 should no longer sell any residential properties in the future.
The goal is to build around 500 subsidised homes for all generations and target groups from single households to families with children via DOGEWO21 or DSG in the next electoral period.
Suitable plots of land should be transferred to DOGEWO21 or DSG and building rights should be created.
The city must free DOGEWO21 from any expectation of profit distribution and provide it with further equity capital for investments.
If the municipal companies are not able to build homes, municipal areas can be transferred to socially oriented providers via ground lease agreements.
Strengthening tenant protection The vacancy rate in Dortmund has halved Some districts have already reached a de facto 100% occupancy rate.
The specific consequences: living space is becoming scarcer, prices are rising and some people looking for accommodation can no longer find suitable homes.
This development shows that tenant protection rights in Dortmund need to be strengthened and instruments for capping rents are necessary.
Instead of this, the black-yellow state government is now planning to abolish all extended tenant protection rights for Dortmund.
That is why we Greens are fighting hard to retain the existing rent caps and notice periods and to introduce a rent brake.
Housing as a basic right In Dortmund there are various groups of people who, for different reasons, have difficulty finding their own accommodation.
We want to enable all locals and newcomers to be self-determined tenants.
The people affected need support and help without major hurdles – in addition to the city’s homeless services.
We therefore support concepts such as Housing First, which directly end homelessness and offer flexible housing support for long-term housing.
We demand that people who receive ALG II, basic security or social assistance receive a climate bonus for energy-efficient renovated homes, based on That is why we support the (re)construction of barrier-free and age-appropriate housing and want to convince homeowners of the advantages of barrier-free and barrier-free housing.
The city of Dortmund and its companies must set a good example with their own construction projects.
Barrier-free living is a social justice!
39 A prerequisite.
There will be no winners who do not build barrier-free.
Create student housing Dortmund is increasingly positioning itself as a large science and university city with over 50,000 students, who are increasingly also living here.
In order to do justice to this development, the necessary framework conditions for students must also be created.
BAföG provides a maximum of €325 for living including all incidental costs, so that many students are in competition with other low-income groups on the housing market.
In order to avoid this competitive situation in the increasingly tight Dortmund housing market, it makes sense to provide more special housing for students.
Student housing should be developed especially on the HSP site if the University of Applied Sciences is to be located here in the future.
It is particularly necessary Furthermore, student housing construction is to be supported by non-repayable subsidies.
C 1.2 Land is a common good In 2018, a first step was taken on a GREEN initiative.
Since then, land has only been allocated according to the concept rather than the highest bid.
However, land is a common good and should be used for the benefit of all.
For this reason, and in order to ensure ecological and sustainable urban development, the city of Dortmund must always remain the owner of the land.
Therefore, in future, only building rights (ground leases) will be granted, so that the land remains in the hands of the city of Dortmund.
The city must also be enabled to buy new land.
Keeping municipal land in public ownership Municipal land should no longer be sold, but rather kept in public ownership through ground leases.
By granting ground leases, the city of Dortmund is put in a position to actively and steeringly take influence on the land market and its (urban) development in the interests of the common good.
After the expiry of the ground lease, the land reverts to the city and the city can adapt the further use to This also applies to commercial properties.
The granting of leasehold property not only secures the municipal property portfolio, but also generates long-term income through the ground rent.
The right of leasehold can make a valuable contribution to the provision of basic services and the sustainable creation and securing of affordable housing, for example by setting lower leasehold rent and/or reduced market values in accordance with the municipal regulations and agreeing longer binding periods.
Prevention of land speculation The common good before profit is our demand for municipal land and housing policy.
Building land and housing must not become objects of speculation.
To counteract this, pre-emption rights (for example, through building planning, regeneration areas and conservation areas) can help, which are established for both the city and actors in the public interest, for example in the form of cooperatives.
Our goal is to increase the stock of housing and land owned by the public sector with an active acquisition strategy.
This also includes anchoring a municipal pre-emption right for entire city districts.
Actors such as cooperatives or foundations, which act in the public interest, should supplement this municipal strategy.
Agreements with owners This includes: improving the supply of affordable housing, promoting alternative mobility (for example, with car-sharing offers, e-charging stations, secure bicycle parking, cargo bike parking, etc.), neighbourhood concepts, the development of the microclimate and ecological construction.
In order to achieve these goals, it must be examined on a case-by-case basis which urban planning instruments (zoning plans, concept bidding, urban planning contracts, diversion agreements) can be used to secure these criteria.
More efficient use of land through space-saving construction.
The available land for the rapid construction of housing is not sufficient.
Therefore, the promotion of rental housing must be given priority, both in new building areas and in the densification of existing building areas.
Since the consumption of land should not increase at the same time, the only option is to use existing land as well as possible.
To this end, the city must make appropriate changes to the zoning plans and increase the permissible number of storeys.
Living in mixed areas can also be used as an effective control element.
We want to promote “double inner development” with qualified green and leisure areas, which combine We are well aware of the potential for conflict, but we want to promote courageous and forward-looking GREEN urban development, even if it is at the expense of single-family home structures.
Densification of housing can also help to make the suburbs more attractive.
Flächenkreislaufwirtschaft: Wiederverwerten von Flächen, statt Versiegelung neuer Flächen We want to avoid sealing off new areas in Dortmund as far as possible.
The conversion and reuse of already developed plots of land and the activation of abandoned land has absolute priority over new development – both for building areas and for commercial areas.
More efficient use of land through the construction of additional floors on parking and commercial areas In Dortmund, multi-storey construction with offices and/or apartments on the upper floors will become the standard for supermarkets in the future.
In order to make better use of existing sealed-off areas, existing parking areas should also be built on accordingly.
Appropriate distribution of existing housing stock In view of the tight housing market, we want to create opportunities for housing to be exchanged voluntarily, at a comparable price per square metre and, if possible, in the same neighbourhood This helps to maintain the social balance in the city's districts and to strengthen social diversity.
Already, on the initiative of the Greens, 10 percent of the land area in new building areas is being reserved for such projects.
This share must be doubled and available land offered to cooperative, community-oriented and common-good oriented building groups.
We want to create opportunities for the city to enable even lower-income households to enter a housing cooperative by granting interest-free loans.
C 1.3 A liveable Dortmund The quality of life in our city is largely dependent on our environment.
That is why we Greens are committed to the development and preservation of green spaces and natural and near-natural habitats in the city area and to the natural design of watercourses.
This creates the basis for species diversity even in urban areas.
We ensure the protection of people from noise and pollutants and we also have the protection of the climate in mind.
The concept of the car-friendly city must be replaced by the goal of the people-friendly city.
A denser, more urban Dortmund can only function with less car traffic and a higher quality of Quality of life means above all: less car traffic, more peace and quiet, more open spaces, parks and lakes, shade-providing trees, green roofs and a socially mixed city without gated communities – neither for the poor nor for the rich.
A GREEN city is not an end in itself.
It is primarily about improving people’s lives, especially for the lower-income Dortmund residents, who are often the ones who have to live, for example, on noisy streets with high levels of air pollution.
They are particularly dependent on social and ecological development of the city.
Community-oriented neighbourhood development When developing new residential neighbourhoods, the community-oriented needs of the surrounding district must be taken into account to a greater extent: examples are housing that meets the needs of the community, social facilities such as childcare centres, community centres and care homes, as well as a retail supply that is close to home.
We want to create opportunities and facilities that allow free participation in social life.
Increased vacancy rates in the town centres lead to a decline in the attractiveness of these central locations.
Together with economic development and good neighbourhood management, There are many initiatives that are working with a lot of know-how to develop, for example, the harbour district, the former HSP site or the northern area at the main train station.
We want to involve citizens in urban planning developments and let their suggestions be included in further planning – with the option that plans can also change.
It is necessary to create participation formats that bridge the gap between planning constraints and open-ended questions.
We want to take the preservation of existing buildings seriously and develop creative design and conversion ideas.
The involvement of building groups, the provision of spaces for communal use, as well as experimental and free spaces are important components of a community-oriented urban development.
Actors who provide a social and cultural added value for the neighbourhood and the urban society have the same importance for us as economic actors.
Creating public spaces For us, the Greens, the expansion, development and design of public spaces is a central future task to promote participation and cohesion in society.
Behind the term “public space” there are not only parks and public squares.
Public spaces bring people of all origins, genders, social classes and ages together.
We want to create offers that make it possible for people to come together We want to create a high quality of stay in public spaces for everyone: with green and water, good seating options, playgrounds, event spaces, art, drinking fountains, toilets, food-sharing stations, bookshelves and more.
Offers for free and pleasant stay in public spaces are an investment in a lively and just community, an important contribution to inclusion and participation.
More quality of life in clean public spaces We Greens are in favor of a quicker removal of illegal waste dumps by the EDG than is currently the case and want to employ more staff in areas with a particularly high proportion of polluted areas, including parks and forests.
We welcome the new pilot project “Einsatzdienst Abfall” (waste disposal service) with currently four employees each from the EDG and the Ordnungsamt, which informs the neighborhood and sanctions misconduct.
In particularly burdened areas, we want to initiate pilot projects with free bulky waste collection days.
Barrier-free access for the entire public space Senior citizens, children and people with disabilities should be able to move safely and independently in the city.
A barrier-free public space with Pedestrian and cyclist areas enliven neighborhoods and increase the quality of stay in public spaces.
We are committed to ensuring that the road space becomes a space for people and is available to all road users on an equal basis.
We want to prioritize non-motorized traffic in future urban and road planning.
Reducing noise Noise not only affects the quality of life, but also has an impact on health.
The city's noise action plan must be continuously developed and contribute to consistently calming particularly noisy areas, especially on busy roads, by reducing speed and traffic volume.
Speed limits of 30 km/h must be the norm.
This also means that the OW IIIa or L 663 n, which would cut through one of the last major quiet zones in Dortmund, will not be further developed.
The Dortmund airport also burdens residents with additional noise.
Therefore, we reject the extension of the runway and any relaxation of the night flight ban.
In the long term, we demand the deconstruction of the airport.
Promoting sustainable construction The construction sector is one of the industries with the highest resource consumption.
At the same time, there is a construction boom in Dortmund.
For us, this means demanding and promoting climate-neutral and sustainable construction according to recognized certification systems.
The assessment of climate neutrality must in future be mandatory for municipal construction projects.
The Sustainable Construction (BNB) assessment system is already being used obligatorily for new buildings by the federal government and some federal states.
The city of Dortmund should introduce the use of the BNB for municipal construction projects and thus live up to its role model.
At state and federal level, we are campaigning for corresponding support programs in the municipal sector.
In order to encourage sustainable construction according to recognized assessment and certification systems in the private sector, support programs could cover the additional costs of planning fees.
SOCIAL JUSTICE!
No displacement of homeless people Poverty, homelessness and lack of housing also belong to the social reality and the cityscape in Dortmund.
We reject the displacement of hom Instead of punishing the homeless for their homelessness, we are committed to the continuous development of support and assistance services.
The men's and women's overnight shelters have been renovated and expanded, and they also offer conceptual help and advice.
However, it is already clear that the available places will not be sufficient in the long term.
In addition, there is a lack of places for homeless couples or for homeless people with dogs.
We are committed to creating expanded services if necessary.
Access to so-called overnight vouchers through the Job Center or the Social Office to enable free overnight stays should be made easier.
Non-Dortmund residents and EU immigrants can only use the overnight shelters for one night free of charge.
This means that these groups are effectively excluded from warm and safe overnight accommodation.
We want to change this.
Winter emergency program We want to improve the assistance for homeless and homeless people in the winter.
In recent years, there have been life-threatening situations when people have spent the night outside.
The opening of the underground stations has been rejected time and time again.
We are therefore calling for a comprehensive emergency aid program for the winter months.
For many years, we have been calling for a heating or midnight bus that provides shelter and housing for homeless people without a place to stay and offers them unbureaucratic survival aid.
Since the end of 2018, there has been a bus that is organized by the Malteser Hilfsdienst Dortmund, the Catholic City Church Dortmund and the Catholic St.
Johannes Society.
The bus provides tea, coffee and hot soup, hygiene articles, warm clothing and sleeping bags for homeless people in the city center several times a week in the evening.
Up to 100 people are reached, cared for and supported every evening.
The operation is carried out exclusively by volunteers and has been financed exclusively by donations to date.
At the request of the GRÜNE Ratsfraktion, the bus will be supported with 10,000 euros annually from 202 We are fighting for the bus to run all year round in the future and to become a permanent part of emergency aid for homeless and housing-less people.
Emergency aid program for EU immigrants A large part of the immigrants from South-East Europe are increasingly affected or threatened by poverty and destitution because they do not meet the legal requirements for recognition of their need for assistance.
Many are homeless or live in precarious living conditions.
They do not have a claim to social benefits or health insurance and are largely excluded from integrative aid.
For example, the Dortmunder Tafel provides food only if the need for assistance is proven by an official certificate of social benefits.
Many of the immigrants do not have this certificate.
In the case of need, the only options left for the affected people are open day centers, soup kitchens or emergency clinics, where they are helped regardless of their legal entitlements.
There is still no independent low-threshold concept or emergency aid program to improve the living conditions of those affected.
We want such a concept to be developed that is based on the specific living situations.
An essential part of such a program must be medical care.
Strengthening existing day care centers – Creating decentralized day care centers We want to strengthen the existing day care centers and secure them with municipal funds.
However, due to the increased and continuously increasing number of homeless people, more small decentralized day care centers are necessary – especially for the increasing number of homeless young people.
In the C 2.
HOMELESS HELP IN DORTMUND, there are many hundreds of homeless and housingless people, the number is higher than officially known and it is still rising.
This is shown by the numbers of visitors to the homeless initiative Gast-Haus e.V., the Kana soup kitchen as well as the men's and women's overnight shelters.
In addition, there are many people who are acutely threatened by homelessness.
All of this is also an expression of the fundamental poverty of many people in the city.
The concept for the further development of homeless assistance adopted in 2018 includes mainly existing aid and support measures and develops them quantitatively.
We demand an additional qualitative development of homeless assistance.
Facilities are, in particular, opportunities to provide washing and personal hygiene.
Housing First In the context of the tight housing market, people in precarious living situations have problems finding adequate housing.
This is especially true for the homeless and those who are currently homeless.
The Housing First concept immediately ends homelessness and offers flexible housing support for permanent housing.
From the outset, there is a normal, unlimited tenancy agreement with all rights and obligations.
This is a crucial difference to the current system, in which those affected must first prove their "housing suitability".
We are committed to introducing the Housing First concept in Dortmund.
SOCIAL JUSTICE!
Strategies for participation in the labor market Despite the efforts of the city, there are still many people in Dortmund who have been unemployed for a long time and who are dependent on state benefits with their families and relatives.
In January of this year, there were still over 83,000 in over 42,000 households in need.
The Job Center is already supporting employers who integrate the long-term unemployed into the first labor market through In addition, we need a publicly funded social job market for people who have been unemployed for a long time and who can foreseeably not get a chance on the first job market.
This means that not only temporary, but also permanent employment relationships must be created.
We are working on this at the federal and state level.
In the past few years, Dortmund has contributed its own financial resources to effectively and sustainably reduce long-term unemployment through local projects with the help of federal and state funds.
We will continue to support this municipal job market strategy.
Instead of solidifying unemployment, we want to create opportunities for participation and strengthen the social and ecological infrastructure in the districts of the city.
Integration of refugees into work and society The integration of refugees who have come to us, as well as EU immigrants into the job market is a special challenge.
It is clear that real integration can only be successful if they can earn their own income and live independently and have a life perspective.
We continue to work towards the integration of refugees into the Dortmund job market.
Within the framework of the municipal job market strategy, all actors in the job market must focus on appropriate With the integration, we are successfully countering the increasing shortage of skilled workers in Dortmund companies and trades.
Perspectives for young people The number of young people without work is still far too high in Dortmund.
In January of this year alone, 2,849 young people under the age of 25 were without a job.
Anyone who starts their working life with a period of unemployment and the associated lack of prospects has poorer prospects for a successful professional future.
The foundations for a good start in working life are already laid in school: A school-leaving certificate is the most important prerequisite for good prospects on the job market.
We will support projects that help young people and young adults in the transition from school to a profession.
Qualification as the key to employment plays a central role in overcoming unemployment.
In particular, the qualification of long-term unemployed people plays a central role.
The learning content and learning forms must be adapted to the different prior knowledge and needs of the people: Some require basic vocational knowledge, others need targeted further training in their profession.
In particular, it is important to prevent the digital divide between people who master Therefore, the offers must take into account the interests and needs of the unemployed; they must also be sustainable in the sense that they provide opportunities for a livelihood and a job that is subject to social insurance.
We support projects and initiatives that make sustainable offers that are oriented towards the needs of the participants.
We want to expand the services of the Dortmund Pass.
The Dortmund Pass provides people who receive social benefits with reduced admission to municipal leisure and cultural activities.
We want to expand the circle of those entitled to benefits to include people with low incomes.
We also want to expand the services of the Dortmund Pass in line with the discounts provided by the Ehrenamtskarte.
C 3.
MUNICIPAL LABOUR MARKET POLICY – The ecological conversion, digitalisation and technological change in the world of work are putting many jobs under pressure.
Dortmund has a long history of structural change.
In the last few years, we have been able to significantly reduce the number of people without employment, together with many labour market policy actors, including the local economy, the employment agency, the job centre and many employers.
We stand for a city in which equal opportunities, fair distribution and self-determination are guaranteed for all people.
For us, inclusion is a cross-cutting task that affects all areas of life, especially that of the elderly.
Inclusive Dortmund – Participation and barrier-free access Participation requires a corresponding barrier-free living environment that benefits everyone.
We are also committed to the further expansion of barrier-free stops and traffic lights for the visually impaired, as well as the lowering of all crossings.
All authorities and offices must also be barrier-free, as well as access to official forms.
Barrier-free access must also be guaranteed in all buildings that receive investment subsidies from the city of Dortmund.
We expect that the main train station will be fundamentally barrier-free after its renovation and we expect the same from other train stations in the city.
We are committed to making participation in everyday life self-explanatory.
Municipal event halls should be equipped or retrofitted with inductive hearing systems so that people with hearing impairments can also participate in public events.
Accompanying service for bus and train Mob Many elderly and mobility-impaired people with wheelchairs, rollators or walking aids, but also visually impaired, blind or deaf people, feel insecure when using buses and trains and require assistance.
A public transportation escort service accompanies passengers from their front door to all the public transportation required on their way to their destination.
It would be an important addition and assistance in an aging society and city.
The establishment of such an escort service, which we have repeatedly requested, has failed in recent years for various reasons.
We want to continue to implement an escort service for public transportation in Dortmund.
Expanding public toilets Sufficient, barrier-free and high-quality public toilets are part of the municipal responsibility of a city.
In particular, older people, but also people with disabilities, rely on a city-wide network of public toilets being available.
The current number of public toilets in the city cannot guarantee equal participation in social life.
We are advocating for a concept to expand and regularly and comprehensively clean public toilets, as well as for the city-wide implementation of the “Nette Toilette” project.
This often makes it difficult to manage their own finances.
At the same time, many seniors want to live independently for as long as possible and remain in the familiar surroundings of their neighbourhood.
However, many are afraid to make a voluntary change of accommodation without support.
At the same time, there are young families with children who need larger accommodation.
We want to bring these different requirements together.
We are therefore calling for the development of a housing exchange and a moving management service in cooperation between the city and housing associations.
Support for multi-generational living Already, there are various multi-generational housing projects in Dortmund, in which younger and older people, families with children and single people live together, plan and make decisions.
Instead of isolating themselves in their own homes, older people are actively involved here.
We will support and promote further multi-generational housing projects in Dortmund.
Setting up health kiosks In some districts, there is not enough medical care because there are not enough doctors' practices.
This is a problem, especially for older people.
Soge - C 4.
GROWING OLD IN DORTMUND Many people in Dortmund are growing older.
Our goal is for them to be able to live independently and actively for as long as possible.
Most people want to stay in their familiar surroundings and participate in everyday life even when they are old.
This is why we need short distances and local help.
This includes good local amenities, good and affordable public transport, sufficient health care and easily accessible and well-equipped meeting and advice centres.
Senior citizens enrich our society with their life experience, knowledge and skills.
We therefore want to enable and support the participation of older people, regardless of how much money they have, how their health is or what language they speak.
Health kiosks offer low-threshold outpatient care and advice on site in other cities, help with the search for medical personnel, with pre- and post-treatment of doctor visits or also with information and explanations of medical findings.
An ambulant care service for chronically ill patients is also attached to this part.
We want to examine the establishment of health kiosks in Dortmund.
Further development of municipal senior homes The municipal senior homes gGmbH with eight senior homes and almost 1,000 places in the city area is an important public service for the care of older people who can no longer live in their own home.
We want to strengthen and further develop these senior homes, especially with regard to intercultural approaches.
We want to expand the area of service apartments for senior citizens.
At the same time, we support the expansion of outpatient services.
C 4.2 Self-determined old age: strengthen the senior citizens' council The elected council for senior citizens is an important municipal body that gives the concerns of older people in Dortmund a voice.
We want to support and strengthen the council in its work.
This also includes a guaranteed right to speak for members Strengthening senior citizens' offices The twelve senior citizens' offices run by the city and the associations of the free welfare sector are an important point of contact in every district for everyday help, cooperation with medical staff and care services, opportunities to meet and communicate, but also for the mediation of active senior citizens' civic engagement.
We are committed to further expanding the services of the senior citizens' offices.
Increasingly culturally sensitive contact persons are necessary, especially in light of the many older immigrants.
We want to promote cooperation between the senior citizens' offices and existing senior citizens' meeting places.
Expanding neighbourhood projects Strong neighbourhoods and lively districts strengthen the quality of the living environment and social community life.
This is of great importance, especially for older people who want to stay in their own home and the familiar surroundings of their district for as long as possible.
We are therefore committed to promoting and implementing neighbourhood projects in the city.
Culturally sensitive senior citizens' work, advice and care Strengthening the prevention of drug abuse for children and young people We are committed to strengthened and credible drug prevention.
In particular, we want to protect children and young people effectively from drugs, for example by excluding advertising for drugs such as alcohol and nicotine on all urban advertising spaces.
The prevention project “Class 2000” has reached too few children in the past.
We want to expand and strengthen this project as well as other existing prevention measures and offers.
Model project for the controlled distribution of cannabis Cannabis is the most commonly consumed illegal drug.
The number of consumers has also risen significantly in Dortmund in recent years.
Bans obviously do not lead to the avoidance of consumption, but instead promote a criminalization in multiple ways: The illegal trade strengthens black market structures, through which consumers can also come into contact with contaminated cannabis and hard drugs.
A controlled distribution of cannabis with a controlled active ingredient content is therefore not only much more sensible than a ban from a health perspective, but also has positive effects for the protection of young people and weakens the black market.
We are therefore advocating for the legal and controlled distribution of cannabis.
This is intended to strengthen the protection of young people and consumers – in contrast If there is the possibility of model projects for the controlled distribution of cannabis, we want to use it for Dortmund.
Expanding opening hours and the use of the drug consumption room The café k!ck, which has now moved to the Grafenhof and is run by aidshilfe, is a vital facility for many people, which has become an integral part of the city's support system.
Drug addicts have a fixed point of contact there, where they can consume their drugs safely, hygienically and under medical supervision, instead of hiding in doorways or backyards.
In addition, syringes and needles are collected and disposed of in a targeted manner, so that they do not end up on playgrounds or other places.
The drug consumption room is therefore also beneficial to the entire city.
Despite the expansion of the places on the initiative of the GREENS, the capacities of the drug consumption room are not sufficient.
We are therefore calling for the opening hours to be further expanded.
At the moment, only drug addicts registered in Dortmund can use the drug consumption room, outsiders cannot.
Many of them buy their drugs in Dort Expanding the range of services in the Nordstadt Especially the Nordstadt urgently needs further help with regard to the drug situation.
The Ordnungsamt has clearly described the current situation: Soft and hard drugs are consumed and traded on playgrounds, on public streets and squares, in green spaces or in house entrances.
The drug consumption room already available at Grafenhof is not used by many addicts in the Nordstadt due to its distance.
However, the residents of the Nordstadt have the justified expectation that drugs will no longer be consumed in front of and in their house entrances.
Ordinance measures alone will not solve this problem.
We are therefore committed to creating additional low-threshold support services for addicts that will also help local residents.
This includes expanding the street social work, especially around the Nordmarkt.
We are committed to equipping one of the planned new drug consumption rooms in the Nordstadt with washing and consumption facilities.
In addition, the installation of syringe dispensers to provide clean syringes and to dispose of used syringes is to be examined.
C 5.
DRUG HELP IN DORTM Dependent people need help, consumers can no longer be criminalized.
With decriminalization, especially of cannabis, the police and public prosecutors will be relieved and financial resources will be freed up for prevention, damage reduction and better therapy offers.
Prevention and help for drug-dependent people are well developed in Dortmund in many places.
And yet there are gaps in the system that need to be filled.
We therefore want to further develop the current drug assistance concept.
For better stabilization of drug consumers, we need, among other things, low-threshold employment opportunities.
We want to offer corresponding opportunities within the framework of the Participation Act.
Intensification of substitution treatment through Diamorphine prescription for heavy addicts Dortmund has a broad and well-established offer of substitution treatment with over 40 substituting doctors as well as the Methadone ambulance of the health department.
We want to maintain and strengthen this offer.
For many years, the Green Party faction in the council has also been calling for a Diamorphine prescription for heavy addicts.
The reasons for this are obvious: A Diamorphine program is a Many of them are in an existentially threatening situation, which has been significantly exacerbated by the high level of control pressure after the closure of the street.
Even criminal proceedings and prison sentences have not led to an exit from prostitution and addiction.
This also shows how little repressive measures against drug addiction help.
The demand for the distribution of diamorphine has been rejected for various reasons.
In the meantime, a majority of the council has agreed to at least a feasibility study for the distribution in a municipal carrier.
We are committed to the fact that the distribution of diamorphine in Dortmund is realized as quickly as possible.
Development of a concept for drug users in old age.
Thanks to the improved support system, drug users are now reaching an ever higher age.
This makes the issue of care for older drug addicts current and poses special requirements.
Because many of those affected suffer from physical and mental sequelae, mobility disorders up to physical disability as a result of their drug addiction.
For many years, the LÜSA (Long-term Transition and Support Offer) state model project in Unna has offered low-threshold residential places in variously designed living facilities for We are working to ensure that a similar concept for older drug addicts is developed and implemented in Dortmund.
The Dortmund model – support for counselling and assistance services For many years, the “Round Table on Prostitution” has been in place, in which, in addition to the administration, counselling services, operators of the red light district and brothel-like establishments, prostitutes and the police also participate.
The aim of this Dortmund model is to take into account the interests of all parties involved and to agree on common goals.
The Round Table on Children and Youth in Prostitution also pursues the goal of providing faster and more unbureaucratic assistance to counteract the continued presence of young people in the milieu.
We are working to continue the work of the Round Tables and to further develop the Dortmund model.
Since 2014, the Midnight Mission has been supported as a specialist counselling service with municipal funds as part of the reorganisation of assistance for prostitutes.
The work includes psychosocial counselling services, outreach social work and street work, as well as comprehensive exit assistance.
The counselling service KOBER also offers Many women practice prostitution in secret and without the knowledge of their private environment.
The registration certificate and the forwarding of the data to the tax authorities raise the fear that this anonymity will be abolished and that those affected will be blackmailed in case of doubt.
We are fighting for the implementation of health counseling in the health department to be adequately staffed and remain free of charge.
It must be ensured that the anonymity is protected as best as possible during the registration process.
Help through a diamorphine ambulance.
With the existing support offers, drug-dependent women in prostitution have only been insufficiently reached.
The provision of diamorphine offers a way to break the vicious circle of addiction and prostitution.
We are fighting for a diamorphine ambulance to be set up in Dortmund as soon as possible.
Securing and financing the work to protect children and young people.
Even minors are prostituting themselves in Dortmund or are forced to become part of prostitution.
The counseling centers assume that there are significantly more than 50 girls.
Many of them have broken off contact with their parents and their circle of friends, live in homelessness There are no public subsidies for their counselling and for help to get out of prostitution.
The counselling and prevention against so-called cyber grooming, the targeted approach of children on the internet to initiate sexual contact, is currently not financially secured.
The counselling centres are dependent on donations for these parts of their work.
We are fighting for the financing and securing of help offers and exit work, prevention in schools and online counselling.
Strengthening of counselling offers for male prostitutes Dortmund is a centre of male prostitution in the eastern Ruhr area.
Approximately 250 boys and men regularly engage in prostitution in our city.
Most of them are affected by massive psychosocial and health problems.
We are fighting for the further and sufficient support of prevention, counselling and support offers for male prostitutes.
Funding of counselling for victims of human trafficking and forced prostitution Especially many African women have become victims of human trafficking and forced prostitution during their flight – including minors.
Counselling is only funded by the state for women who have become vict The state is particularly called upon here.C 6.
HELP FOR PEOPLE IN PROSTITUTION In Dortmund, over 1,000 women and men work in prostitution.
Our goal is to improve their legal and social situation.
At the same time, we are committed to their greatest possible protection.
It is important to us to protect them from any form of exploitation and violence.
However, we also oppose all efforts to criminalize and discriminate against people in prostitution.
There is no evidence that repression and criminalization prevent prostitution.
Banning prostitution does not make it disappear, as experience in other countries shows.
Prostitution would be relocated, less visible, which means that prostitutes can be less protected.
Instead, we want to strengthen counseling and support services.
C 7.1 Police, city and citizens in partnership GRÜN vote for: Citizen-friendly police instead of video surveillance We want a city in which citizens can move freely and uninhibitedly and at the same time feel safe.
An expansion of video surveillance and monitoring in public spaces leads to stigmatization and possible displacement effects without solving the actual problems.
Studies show that video surveillance cannot prevent crimes.
In addition, data protection and interference with personal freedoms speak against more surveillance.
The data protection officer for NRW also warns of the risk of an almost unlimited expansion of police video surveillance in public spaces.
This would gradually also lead to a desensitization to the problem of video surveillance.
We therefore reject an expansion of video surveillance and monitoring.
The cameras installed in 2016 in Brückstraße and on Leeds Platz on the basis of a decision by the Minister of the Interior and the police have not led to more security.
In the video-monitored area, there was even an increase in street crime.
At the same time, the cameras lead to an increase in surveillance and observation While alternatives can be chosen on the way through the shopping arcades, this is not possible on the way to one's own home.
Therefore, we fundamentally reject the surveillance of pure residential areas, which also stigmatizes entire streets.
Instead, we advocate for regular patrols by a police force close to the people and the municipal order partnerships, in order to strengthen the sense of security of the population through personal exchange and to prevent crimes through quick and regular intervention.
Municipal police complaints office Since 1996, the UN Human Rights Committee has repeatedly renewed its demand for an independent mechanism for investigating complaints about the unlawful use of force by police officers.
The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms also guarantees a ban on degrading treatment in Article 3 and emphasizes that an effective and official investigation must be initiated in the event of allegations of police abuse.
This individual right to effective complaint to domestic authorities corresponds to the basic principles of a democratic society.
Therefore, we will examine the possibilities for establishing an effective and independent municipal police complaints system.
Municipal order partnerships The municipal order partnerships We are fighting for the principle of having one* employee of the Ordnungsamt and one* police officer on each patrol again.
The state is called upon to provide the additional police positions required for this.
We reject the equipping of municipal employees with batons or other weapons.
Increase in the subjective sense of security.
A low quality of public spaces and areas increases the risk of so-called “fear spaces”, where people are afraid of becoming victims of crime.
This sometimes leads to many people no longer using certain paths or places.
We are fighting for urban planning and development that places the safety of public spaces and paths at the center.
Places and paths must be easy to see, well lit and barrier-free.
The fencing off of public areas with the aim of driving out undesirables.
SAFETY IN DORTMUND: In recent years, crime in Dortmund has continuously decreased.
At the same time, more and more crimes are being solved.
Nevertheless, some people live in fear of violence, burglary or assault in public spaces, on streets and squares or even in public transport.
We are dealing with this contradictory development with deliberate action and a sober analysis.
We are relying on urban planning and design measures to minimize fear spaces and further on strengthening the neighborhood within the districts as well as an effective, partnership cooperation of the municipal authorities with the police.
For us, a safe Dortmund also includes the strengthening of the fire department and disaster control.
We reject the practice of people, as has been done since the beginning of the year in Keuningpark.
If people feel their city, their district, their neighborhood as safe, if places become lively places where social control takes place, then the risk for criminality and the subjective feeling of security increases.
We therefore want a systematic analysis to record so-called “fear spaces” on paths, streets and squares in the public space and a program to implement suitable measures.
Decriminalization of cannabis Through the illegal trade in drugs – especially cannabis – black market structures are also strengthened in Dortmund, where hard drugs also come into play.
We are therefore advocating for a controlled distribution of cannabis.
This would not only decriminalize adult consumers, but also reduce the black market on streets, squares or C 7.2 Civic engagement for a safe Dortmund Solidarity in neighbourhoods and districts Strong neighbourhoods and lively districts strengthen social cohesion, lead to a higher quality of living environment and strengthen security.
Citizens' identification with their neighbourhoods is created, among other things, by their involvement in the joint planning and design of neighbourhoods, paths, streets and squares in their living environment.
Citizens who can make the public space their own concern themselves more with their neighbourhood and the people living there.
We therefore want to realise as many neighbourhood projects as possible in the city in order to involve more citizens in the design of their city.
The city is required to support self-initiated projects within the scope of its possibilities, to record and mediate open spaces and to be available as a contact partner, for example for legal problems.
As contact partners for local concerns, we want to continue to promote the work of the neighbourhood helpers throughout the city.
Through their diverse activities - from smaller cleaning work to conflict resolution to support for social institutions, clubs or events - the neighbourhood helpers play an important role in the districts.
We support the idea that in future, long-term unemp The AKIM is a central agency that carries out a first conflict analysis for the entire city area for inquiries about conflict resolution in public spaces and is present on site with purely communicative means.
The AKIM conflict managers become active in conflicts in public spaces, where other agencies are not responsible or their intervention would not be proportionate.
The AKIM conflict managers act on site to calm conflicts and intervene by explaining the rules in public spaces.
They refer to responsible agencies for further assistance or intervene directly.
In doing so, they advocate for the interests and concerns of all user groups and try to mediate between them.
In Munich, the All-Party Conflict Management was awarded the Eurocities Award 2019 because it handles different conflicts in public spaces throughout the city in a low-threshold and low-effort manner.
In addition, we want to have the establishment of night mayors examined.
In many cities, there is already such a position for networking night culture and night economy as well as for resolving conflicts between gastronomy, visitors and residents.
C 7.3 Future viability of fire brigade and disaster control Securing infrastructure and financial We are committed to ensuring that all citizens are comprehensively and transparently informed about how they should behave in the event of danger and what information is available.
The options that have been used up to now must be reviewed and, if necessary, supplemented.
Adapting the emergency services to an ageing society Together with the aid organisations, the fire brigade ensures comprehensive emergency services, including emergency medical care and ambulance services.
In an ageing society, the demands on an effective emergency service are increasing.
The municipal emergency service demand plan provides a good basis for saving lives in an emergency: it ensures that the emergency services can reach the scene of an emergency within 8 minutes in most cases.
There are always attempts to water down the 8-minute target in the demand plan – we reject this.
Support and recognition for the main and honorary staff The Dortmund fire brigade, emergency services and disaster protection are well organised; the services generally enjoy great public trust and respect.
This is particularly due to the high level of commitment and performance of the main and, in particular, the honorary staff.
Therefore, we are firmly opposed to We support the commitment of the fire department and aid organizations in gaining new participants – especially from Dortmund residents with a migration background.
We also support the fire department with a strong emphasis on promoting young people and the youth fire department.
Updating the Dortmund Pandemic Plan The Corona virus has shown that a pandemic can paralyze a city, or even an entire country, within a very short time – with massive effects and consequences.
We want to learn from Corona and are committed to urgently updating the Dortmund Pandemic Plan based on the experiences with Corona.
SOCIAL JUSTICE!
D 1.1 Support for children and families In Dortmund, every third child under 15 years of age is affected by poverty or threatened by poverty.
Child poverty is associated with a higher health risk, lower participation, as well as lower educational and future opportunities.
Every child has the right to participation, to belonging, to education, social security and free development of their personality.
Poverty often stands in the way of these rights: children cannot pursue their hobbies because, for example, the sports equipment is too expensive.
Children avoid their friends' birthday parties because they can't afford to buy a present.
Poverty is not just about "not being able to afford it", but unfortunately, it is also about "not being able to participate".
We are fighting child poverty Child poverty affects or threatens every third child in Dortmund.
We are committed to sustainably changing this unbearable situation.
At the federal level, we are calling for the creation of an independent and adequate child basic security, which bundles existing benefits and pays them out without bureaucracy.
Create educational justice The fight against poverty and especially child poverty is and will remain a priority goal of Dortmund's urban development.
We are committed to a city in which children and young people are not disadvantaged due to their (social) background.
We want to improve and equalize the very different starting conditions of many children.
This is necessary, among other things, to break the existing connection between poverty and unfair educational opportunities.
This starts in kindergarten and continues in schools.
When creating educational justice, unequal things must be treated unequally.
That is why funds and resources must be bundled more effectively in daycare centers and schools where they are most urgently needed.
Educational institutions as the key to equal opportunities We want to contribute to all children and young people getting the same opportunities – regardless of their family of origin – with sufficient daycare places, longer joint learning, and bound and open after-school programs in schools.
We want to exempt additional families with low incomes from daycare fees.
We are also fighting for a free ticket, with which all children and young people can use buses and trains in Dortmund, regardless of the financial possibilities of their families.
Education and Participation Package – Introduction of a YouCard Existing support options only help if they arrive.
In the case of the funds of the Education and Participation Package, this was not always the case in recent years.
In Dortmund, around 46,000 children and young people from low-income families are entitled to benefits.
By far not all of them have applied for and received the services owed to them from the Education and Participation Act for lunch, school supplies, We want to create the conditions for all eligible children and young people and their families to receive the funds they are entitled to without red tape and without any detours.
To this end, we also want to examine the introduction of a YouCard, which will allow the benefits of the education package to be claimed easily and without red tape.
Family-friendly urban development: Families are where children live.
We are committed to a city in which families can live their lives according to their own ideas.
Families need affordable housing that is tailored to their needs.
With traffic-calmed or car-free zones, D 1.
CHILDREN AND YOUNG PEOPLE Children and young people are the most important part of our society, they are our future.
Every child, every young person has the right to support for the development of an independent personality and the best possible protection by the state and society.
Fair opportunities for all, combating poverty, spaces for self-determined development, opportunities for participation in the joint development of our city – this is what we put at the heart of our politics with and for children, young people and their families.
GREEN IS...
The future!
How we want to make Dortmund a city of tomorrow with good education, sustainable economy and a capable administration.D in which children can move freely.
Many children are increasingly lacking space and room for outdoor play.
This is a result of the 2020 Children's Report of the German Children's Fund.
Even in Dortmund, space for children is scarce, especially in the inner city districts.
We are therefore committed to the establishment of temporary and permanent play streets, which are closed to vehicles or only used by local residents.
Families need childcare facilities close to home, without having to accept long travel times.
Families need support, especially in difficult life situations.
We are committed to a Dortmund in which families receive the help they need.
Strengthening early childhood support We want good starting opportunities for all children from the beginning.
That is why we are committed to supporting children as early as possible in their development.
We want to further expand existing offers and systems of early childhood support and strengthen the networking and cooperation of institutions and offers.
D 1.2 Self-determined childhood and youth We GREENS do not want to shape Dortmund for children and young people, but with them.
Regardless of whether they are entitled to vote or not: Everyone in Dortmund should be able to help shape the city in which we all live.
Regardless of whether it is school, youth club or residential area: Children and young people know what they need and have a right to have a say.
Open youth work – opening up schools, supporting self-administration The facilities of open youth work are public spaces for self-determined leisure time for and by children and young people.
We want to strengthen and modernise open youth work as an important field of extra-curricular learning experiences.
Gender-sensitive approaches should also be strengthened.
In addition to maintaining existing facilities, we are committed to examining the opening of schools to facilities of open children’s and youth work.
This will allow schools to develop into a meeting place and cultural centre outside of formal learning – also for children and young people from the school environment.
Where there are efforts towards self-administered open facilities and centres, we will support them.
Pres Young people in particular need non-commercial spaces for their cultural, creative or sporting activities or simply as informal meeting places that they can use spontaneously.
We are committed to ensuring that there are corresponding spaces and areas in every district where young people can try out their cultural, musical or sporting activities.
This also applies to rehearsal rooms for young bands.
In the case of informal meeting places for young people, we rely on dialogue and compromise rather than bans in the event of conflicts arising from different needs – especially between young people and older people.
Co-determination from the outset – youth forums and youth parliament We want the greatest possible participation of children and young people in the development of our city.
Because only those who are taken seriously from the outset and feel that they can change things themselves learn about democracy from the beginning.
We are therefore committed to ensuring that children and young people are involved in all decisions that affect them.
Their opinions, wishes and proposals can best be expressed when they can co-determine all the places where they grow up.
This applies to their daily living environment in daycare centres and schools.
It also applies to urban planning and The city-wide youth forums are a good and proven instrument.
They offer an open opportunity for participation in every district of the city on all issues of the district, the borough and the entire city.
It must be ensured that as many children and young people as possible can use this opportunity.
This requires professional support.
In addition, we demand the establishment of a youth parliament with its own budget and the right to speak in council meetings and committees.
The work of the youth parliament is accompanied by full-time pedagogical staff.
Participation in the child and youth promotion plan The previous child and youth promotion plan will be continued for the years 2021-2025.
We are committed to ensuring that children and young people are involved in the creation of the plan as part of a comprehensive participation process.
This applies in particular to the prioritization of the promotion plan for the coming years.
In order to successfully shape integration, the situation of the many newly arrived young people and their families must also be the focus of child and youth promotion planning.
We also consider gender-specific offers to be important.
THE FUTURE!
57D 1.3 Queer your world Unfortunately, many queer people still experience exclusion, disadvantage and physical attacks.
Coming out, which often takes place during youth, is a big challenge for lesbian, gay, bi-, pan-, and asexual, queer, trans*, inter* and nonbinary youth; some youth need support.
Vote GREEN for: Acceptance and equal treatment of all sexual identities of children and youth We are committed to ensuring that the various sexual identities of young people are accepted and treated equally and that every person is supported in their individual development.
We support the SUNRISE project as a meeting place and counselling centre for young lesbians, gays, bi-, pan- and asexual, queer, trans*, inter* and nonbinary people.
Schools and youth work are also required to provide unrestricted support.
We are committed to the permanent support of the SCHLAU project, which visits schools and youth facilities to conduct workshops on sexual and gender diversity.
We want gender-specific youth work to be strengthened.
The interests We support the Dortmund Girls’ Network as a municipal alliance for the concerns and needs of girls and young women.
The specific needs of boys should also be taken into account in youth work: Often, positive role models are lacking outside of traditional masculinity, which can offer orientation to boys.
Traditional masculinity puts boys under pressure, reproduces classic role distributions and pushes boys and men towards a riskier lifestyle.
1.4 Sustainable support for young people We Greens want a well-equipped youth welfare service that supports young people – and also young adults – in growing up.
Good equipment for street work The number of young people without a fixed residence is increasing.
We want to expand the support services for them.
This also includes a well-equipped street work in terms of concept and personnel for direct contact on site.
We also want to include the “Rampe II” project, which runs until 2021 in the district of Hörde and is a project of outreach youth work that is aimed in particular at young people in the district who are at risk in their development due to social problems, in a city-wide street work concept.
Long-term support for Like other young people, they are often not well prepared for independent living at the age of 18.
We are committed to ensuring that such "care leavers" continue to receive educational support and are able to organise themselves after the end of youth welfare services.
Preventing the radicalisation of young people We are committed to preventing young people from slipping into human-hating and violence-glorifying ideologies, whether they are right-wing extremist or Islamist.
This can only be achieved through a culture of looking out for each other.
We want to prevent radicalisation from the outset with a prevention strategy.
This must deal with experiences of discrimination and exclusion among young people and remove barriers to equal participation.
In order to dry up the breeding ground for radicalisation, we need a strong child and youth welfare service and good schools that live diversity and participation.
We want to maintain and expand existing counselling and support services.
THE FUTURE!
D 2.1 Expansion of care places A high-quality care place in a day care centre or in a childminder must be available to every child if required.
Despite all previous efforts, there is still a The number of care places planned so far for 41 percent of children under three is not enough for the increasing number of children and the needs of many parents.
Expansion of high-quality care places The care offer must be significantly and quickly expanded, especially for children under three years of age.
The districts with the current lowest supply rates must be given priority in the expansion.
In particular, a 100 percent supply of places must be ensured as quickly as possible in all districts for children from three years of age until they are of school age.
We are committed to ensuring that there are still sufficient places in Dortmund day care facilities for children with disabilities or children who are at risk of becoming disabled.
Expansion of care times Whether single parents, working parents or parents with more flexible working hours – the life reality of many families and parents has changed significantly in recent years for many reasons.
This has also had an impact on time sequences and structures and thus also on demands on child care.
Fixed care times in day care facilities no longer do justice to this.
We are therefore committed to expanding and making care times in day care facilities and day care more flexible.
Expansion of family centers Currently there are 88 day care centers We are committed to further expanding the number of family centers.
Expansion of nurseries Nurseries are large-scale childcare facilities, in which a maximum of nine children are cared for by three day care providers.
The pedagogical focus is on language development and movement, and is intended to prepare children for the transition to day care.
At the same time, the nurseries offer a low-threshold service for parents and, in particular, enable people from population groups with particular access difficulties to easily enter the education, training and care system.
We want to further expand the number of nurseries, particularly in the Soziale Stadt action areas.
Free childcare as a long-term goal Our fundamental goal is free childcare in day care centers and day care – just like with school attendance.
The state government is responsible for this financially.
It is not enough that the state only provides the last two years of free childcare.
As long as there is no general cost exemption by the state, we demand a land-wide uniform assessment instead of the currently varying parental contributions from town to town.
We will also work to ensure that the income limit in the municipal contribution ordinance is gradually raised.
This will allow more low- A reduction in parental contributions must not be at the expense of an improvement in quality and the urgently needed expansion of daycare and childcare places.2.
PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION AND UPBRINGING Dortmund is growing.
In recent years, the number of newborn children has risen.
The number of children in our city has also risen due to the influx of immigrants and their families.
This is something we are happy about.
According to a forecast by the German Youth Institute, the number of children under three years of age in Dortmund will continue to rise – to over 19,000 according to the forecast in 2025.
This has an impact on the necessary care options until the age of school attendance.We are committed to ensuring that all children in Dortmund have the same good start in life – regardless of their social or other background.
At the same time, every child is unique and has a right to the best possible individual support from the outset.
High-quality, reliable, sufficient and financially viable or, if possible, free care options are an important key to this.
Despite the great expansion efforts of the last few years and currently, the places created in child day care centers and child day care are not sufficient.
We want to hold on to the proven Dortmund variety of providers and expand it during the further expansion of child day care centers.
This also applies in particular to the support of parent initiatives.
The proportion of the municipal FABIDO facilities in the total city child care places should be at least 30 percent.
Such a provider structure creates the possibility for all parents to search for a suitable facility of their choice.
We want to lease municipal land for the construction of new day care centers to investors as long as possible.
The lease can then only be granted to non-profit, non-profit-oriented free providers or to the municipal provider FABIDO.
A good quality child care is primarily a social task and not a business.
It must not depend on the parents' money.
We view the establishment and operation of privately-owned day care centers critically.
We reject additional parent contributions.
When building and expanding childcare facilities, it is important to ensure that the needs of younger children (U2) are taken into account.
Transparent and easy registration We are committed to making access to childcare offers more transparent and easier.
For the first time, the digital registration process of the KITA Plus Portal can be used for registration for the 2020/21 kindergarten year.
We want to evaluate and further develop the process, especially with regard to the allocation of places in childcare.
The KITA portal must lead to a noticeable easing of the search for childcare places for families.
2.2 Quality in care In childcare facilities and other institutions, it is not just about care, but also about education.
Every institution must be equipped and designed to meet this standard.
We want to provide a child-friendly education from the beginning.
Early childhood education is a decisive key to participation and educational justice for all children.
The earlier a child has access to education, the less the connection between origin and educational success will have an impact.
Our childcare facilities must meet this demand as early childhood education facilities.
Early childhood education from the start.
We are committed to high-quality care in the facilities with the binding implementation of pedagogical quality criteria.
Childcare facilities in areas with particular needs require additional staffing.
We are committed to expanding cultural offerings in the facilities.
We want to strengthen and promote the intercultural orientation of childcare and language development for the benefit of all children.
Movement in childcare facilities Our childcare facilities are of particular importance in promoting healthy development and sufficient movement in children.
More and more children are suffering from posture damage, overweight, coordination disorders and impairments of perception.
Movement must therefore be a matter of course in childcare facilities.
Already, the promotion of movement in childcare facilities is given great importance, some explicitly see themselves as “movement kindergartens”.
The State Sports Association awards the “Recognized Movement Kindergarten” seal of approval to childcare facilities that work together with local sports clubs.
We want to improve the conditions for this and expand the proportion of “movement kindergartens”.
We are committed to childcare facilities having their own movement Healthy day care centres – healthy food More and more children are staying in day care centres for longer periods of time.
Fresh, healthy and varied food is an important part of this – with foods predominantly from the region and organic quality.
We have already applied for this for the city’s day care centres years ago.
We support the use of the “optiMIX” quality seal of the Research Institute for Children’s Nutrition for the catering in all day care centres.
We are committed to ensuring that as many facilities as possible have their own kitchens, in which meals are freshly prepared and children can be involved.
This is how we want to inspire children to eat healthily and varied.
For new constructions of day care centres, adequately equipped kitchens must be planned in.
In existing facilities, we want to optimise existing kitchens and set up group kitchens.
Forest day care centres, fair day care centres and education for sustainable development We are committed to ensuring that children come into contact with nature at an early age.
This is good for their health and strengthens their connection with nature In addition to basic values and skills, children learn in day care centers that they can shape things and that their actions have an impact on others and their environment.
This idea is reflected in the principles of Education for Sustainable Development (ESD).
We are committed to anchoring the aspect of sustainability in the work of day care centers.
By 2021, all municipal day care centers will be certified as “Fair Day Care Centers.” Good Transition from Day Care to School The transition from day care and day care centers to the first year of school is a significant step for many children and parents.
Close cooperation between the institutions is intended to make the transition easier and better.
This also applies in particular to the time between the last day in day care and the first day of school.
Many parents face major organizational problems during the several weeks of the summer holidays without regular care.
Therefore, we are committed to creating coordinated transition management between day care centers and schools, which also includes care options provided by day care centers and schools.
2.3 Support for Staff in Educational and Care Facilities The work in educational and care facilities is dependent – both qualitatively and quant They deserve respect for their work.
With this principle, we want to make policy in Dortmund in the area of childcare.
Upgrading educational and care work The demands on care and educational work in day care facilities and child day care and thus also on the employees are increasing.
We are committed to fair and just remuneration and increased investment in the training of educators.
This is also intended to upgrade and make care work in day care facilities and child day care more attractive.
In order to increase the proportion of male educators in day care facilities, we are committed to developing a concept that promotes vocational training.
We want to continue to expand the practice-integrated training.
Gender-sensitive education should continue to be promoted.
Social work in day care facilities We want to reach and support particularly disadvantaged children and families early on, even in day care facilities.
In addition to the structures that are already in place, social work in day care facilities can make an effective contribution to this.
This is intended to offer children good participation prospects in kindergarten life, to identify family and social emergencies at an early stage, and to promote and strengthen the competencies of children and their families.
We are therefore committed to establishing permanent positions for social workers in kindergarten facilities in certain districts, and to creating an additional support offer for families with children from birth to school entry.
THE FUTURE!
D 3.1 Strengthening the Dortmund educational landscape Good education requires good schools.
We are not only concerned with educational content, but also with how learning is done and what a good learning environment should look like.
Expansion and renovation of our schools We want the best possible schools, barrier-free with sufficient space, with modern and up-to-date technical equipment for students and teachers, with a canteen for catering during full-day courses, with clean toilets, with their own school gardens, with space for playing, hanging out and relaxing.
In recent years, an additional 4,000 students have been accepted at Dortmund schools, and the numbers are expected to continue to rise.
Investments of over one billion euros are therefore planned for new construction and They therefore deserve our special appreciation and support.
The number of pupils at primary schools will rise by around 3,000 to 25,500 in the coming years.
The need for school places is rising sharply in almost all districts of the city.
We are committed to ensuring that the necessary new buildings and extensions are realised continuously and as quickly as possible.
All existing primary school sites must be retained in view of the rising number of children.
The need for new schools or extensions to existing schools must be taken into account when planning new building developments.
School development planning must be continually updated in a timely manner.
We want to develop our primary schools into family centres.
This is intended to extend the tried and tested work of family centres in child day care facilities to primary schools.
This will make it easier for parents to access low-threshold support services, bring various actors from the district into the schools and strengthen preventive networks.
This also requires good and coordinated transition management between day care centers and primary schools.
Strong secondary schools and longer joint learning The increasing number of students in the primary grades also has an impact on our secondary schools.
Both at the grammar schools and the comprehensive schools there is an urgent need for action, as shown by the registration figures of the last few years.
Joint learning is the future.
This is also why more and more parents in Dortmund are choosing comprehensive schools for their children.
We welcome and support this.
However, for years the places available throughout the city have not been enough, and in the future there will be a shortage of several hundred places.
The already approved expansions at three comprehensive schools as well as the conversion of the Reinoldi secondary school in Westerfilde into a comprehensive school can only be a first step to create the necessary capacity.
We are advocating for an additional new comprehensive school in the event of a further increase in demand.
The registration figures for grammar schools are also increasing.
In addition, the welcome return to G9 throughout the city leads to additional space requirements.
Therefore, we need to expand the capacities of the existing grammar schools and possibly build an additional school.
We are committed to ensuring that any remaining school containers are replaced as quickly as possible by the necessary expansions of the grammar schools.
In the process, the construction of necessary canteens must also be taken into account when expanding the full-day offerings.
On the way to an inclusive education system, we also need the support of special schools for the time being.
Parents who decide to send their children to a special school must have comprehensive options to do so.
In light of the projected increase in the number of children, the need for school places at the special schools must be continuously reviewed.
We want to continue to strengthen our eight municipal vocational colleges.
They take on various tasks in the education system.
We want to continue to strengthen, improve and make our schools fairer.
The future prospects of our children are a matter close to our hearts.
Their joint education in well-equipped schools is a key to enabling them to lead a fulfilled, secure and self-determined life and to enable them to participate in society in a solidary way.
We want an education system that gives children security, self-confidence and security.
We are committed to ensuring that every child is promoted as best as possible, regardless of their starting conditions, and can develop their potential.
A good education system is therefore always a fair education system with real opportunities for all.
The vocational colleges are an essential part of the dual education system.
They offer the possibility of further education up to the Abitur and Fachabitur, are important as vocational schools, provide orientation and training readiness, and do valuable work in integration and inclusion.
We are committed to continuously developing the development plan of the vocational colleges and to examining the further development into regional vocational training centers.
Similarly to the secondary level I, we want to develop a transition monitoring for the transitions from vocational colleges, comprehensive schools and grammar Expansion of high-quality full-day care We are committed to ensuring that the legal entitlement to a full-day school place in primary schools and secondary schools in Dortmund is implemented as quickly as possible, so that all children can be provided for before 2025.
Every child should receive a full-day place at their school if required – in a full-day school or in the open full-day care.
We want to break down the classic separation between lessons and subsequent care at schools.
This applies to the content and the teamwork with multi-professional specialists as well as to a shared space concept.
Good, high-quality and reliable care after school is not only family-friendly, but also offers space for joint formal and informal learning.
In full-day care, children can try things out, develop their creativity and experience things.
We are committed to ensuring that full-day care is offered free of charge in principle.
A full-day school of every school type in every district In Dortmund, 14 primary schools, secondary schools and grammar schools as well as all nine comprehensive schools are currently full-day schools, in which all students are obliged to participate in the full- Faster expansion of OGS places We also want to massively expand the places in the Open Day Care (OGS) - at the primary schools as well as at the secondary schools for the students of the first secondary level.
Only for a little more than 50 percent of the primary school students are OGS places available city-wide.
The current plans see an expansion by 2022/23 to then around 15,000 places.
At the same time, the number of children is still rising strongly city-wide, the need for an OGS place is growing for many parents.
The expansion plans must therefore be accelerated and expanded.
In addition to necessary conversions and extensions, the already existing school rooms in the schools must also be used for the day care.
This cannot be achieved with municipal funds alone.
That is why we are pushing for the Federal Government to also finance the operating costs via the states according to need in addition to the necessary expansion.
3.2 Good schools in Dortmund We want a school education that gives children self-confidence, security and a sense of belonging.
Education must preserve and promote the joy of learning that every child brings with them.
Our understanding of performance is that every child is challenged and supported according to their individual strengths.
Only in this way can they develop and learn in a stimulating and protected environment.
We want to create the framework conditions for this in Dortmund.
Digital education in our schools The digitalisation is massively changing the way we live, learn and work.
Children and young people are growing up in a world where digital media and the internet are commonplace and available at all times.
This requires new knowledge, but above all new competencies.
These include not only the use of applications and programming techniques, but also dealing with risks, functions and opportunities, as well as comprehensive media competence.
We are committed to ensuring that our schools are best equipped for this.
What is crucial here is not only a functioning hardware, but in particular the support of media pedagogical specialists and the continuous further training of teachers.
The financial resources available to Dortmund schools through the “Digital School Package” are to be used entirely and on time for the provision of digital presentation technology and digital work equipment and tablets.
The municipal master plan “Digital Education” is to be continually developed with the participation of all relevant actors.
Inclusive Schools The greatest possible participation of all people in social life – this is the basic idea of inclusion.
This also applies to access to education.
We are therefore committed to ensuring that all children are welcome at all schools and all types of school.
We stand for the right to the best possible social and scholastic development for all pupils, for an inclusive school system, for joint lessons for pupils with and without disabilities.
At the moment, around 2,400 pupils with special educational needs are taking part in joint learning at Dortmund’s comprehensive schools.
We want to encourage parents, teachers and children to take part in joint learning by creating good framework conditions.
In particular, we want to motivate grammar schools to open up to joint learning.
For an expansion of joint learning, the state must make special needs educational support staff available.
THE FUTURE!
63 We are committed to creating the spatial conditions necessary for communal learning.
Our schools are to be designed to be barrier-free in principle, including the furnishings and fittings.
Free tickets for all students Access to education and participation must not be made more difficult by mobility barriers.
We want to make it easier for all children and young people to access environmentally friendly mobility with buses and trains, to get them excited about it – and to do so free of charge, if possible.
The chocolate ticket for students is currently linked to conditions that not all children can meet.
This is mainly due to the distance to the respective school.
In particular, families with low incomes who do not receive transfer payments, as well as families with many children who are not entitled to benefits, are additionally disadvantaged.
Therefore, we want to gradually enable all students and trainees to use public transport free of charge.
Healthy and natural schools Good school also means: healthy school.
This particularly applies to the midday meal provision in schools with a full-day offer.
We are committed to high-quality nutrition, with a predominance of regional and organic food.
And: no food without a canteen.
As part of the expansion of full-day care, we want to initiate a programme to expand school canteens.
In order for all children to benefit from high-quality catering, more municipal subsidies must be provided for this.
In addition, we demand free provision of water at schools, for example through drinking fountains.
We want to strengthen education for sustainable development (ESD) at our schools.
This is intended to enable pupils to understand the impact of their own actions and to make responsible, sustainable decisions – especially in relation to environmental and climate protection.
The school garden programme, which was passed on the initiative of the GREENS, is an important contribution to this.
We want to support existing school gardens and create new ones.
This should also involve initiating cooperation with nearby allotment associations, especially where schools cannot provide their own grounds.
School biological center for sustainable development We want to develop the school biological center in the Botanical Garden Rombergpark and the Zoo Dortmund into a school biological center for sustainable development.
More and more people, especially young people, are concerned about the effects of their lifestyle and consumption on others and on future generations.
Education for sustainable development should help to understand the effects of one's own actions on the environment, to enable future-oriented thinking and action and to make responsible, sustainable decisions.
The previous good work of the school biological center as an extra-curricular learning location should therefore be expanded accordingly.
Safe school routes Children and young people must be able to get to their schools and also to their day care centers safely - by bus, bike, scooter or on foot.
We want to promote and strengthen the self-determined, safe and sustainable mobility of children and young people.
This requires mobility concepts at schools and day care centers with and for children, parents, teachers and educators.
The program "So läuft das" to promote children's and youth mobility has developed appropriate concepts for the first primary schools Rethinking schoolyards Schoolyards are more than just a break room.
They are a space for relaxation, but also for movement and communication.
Schoolyards should arouse curiosity, offer learning opportunities, promote imagination and creativity, invite play and movement, provide space for withdrawal and relaxation, promote social interaction, and take into account the needs and requirements of girls and boys.
Many schoolyards do not meet these requirements.
We want to change this with our own program for redesigning schoolyards.
We are committed to planning schoolyards together with the children and young people of the school, but also from the neighborhood.
In many residential areas and neighborhoods, there are only a few play and recreational opportunities for children and young people.
Therefore, it is important to open schoolyards to children and young people from the neighborhood during non-teaching time and to network them with other playgrounds and green spaces as valuable play resources.
3.3 Fair schools Green education policy aims to achieve educational justice.
We want to combat educational disadvantage as a result of unequal living conditions of families.
We want to prevent social segregation by promoting longer joint learning.
THE FUTURE!
In Dortmund, one in three children under the age of 15 is affected by poverty or is at risk of poverty.
Those who are poor have poorer educational opportunities.
We want to sustainably change this situation and improve the very different starting conditions of many children.
Therefore, when it comes to access to education, we believe that what is unequal is treated unequally.
Social index for Dortmund schools Schools with the greatest social and educational challenges require the greatest support.
The state is called upon to better and more effectively control the allocation of teacher positions with the goal of educational justice using a social index.
The city as the school authority must focus material resources on those schools where the need is greatest.
To this end, we want to develop a school-specific social index in Dortmund as a steering instrument.
Preservation and expansion of school social work Children and young people grow up in a society that is characterized by strong changes.
School social workers support them in the integration of their learning and living situations.
This also serves the purpose of equal opportunities.
We are committed to ensuring that all Dortmund schools receive at least one position for school social work.
We will continue to call on the state and federal government to provide funding for school social work.
Supporting children in the classroom, in school life and during after-school activities is an important and indispensable tool for joint lessons between students with and without disabilities.
Over 1,000 students in Dortmund now use this support service.
We are committed to ensuring that every child receives support through school social work if required.
And for schools, too: where help is required in the care of children and young people with disabilities, it must be provided.
Where the agreed framework conditions of teaching make support services for schools necessary, cooperation between schools and youth welfare services should be strengthened.
The framework for school social work in Dortmund should be continuously evaluated and further developed.
Schools as places of life and learning for all We want to open our schools beyond the classroom as places of life and learning.
Because the times when schools were hermetically sealed systems are a thing of Already, many comprehensive schools have made agreements with external partners, cooperating with youth welfare, inclusion experts, sports clubs and cultural education institutions.
We are committed to ensuring that schools develop into meeting places and cultural centres for their neighbourhoods, even outside of school hours.
This also includes examining the opening of schools to facilities for open youth work and youth clubs.
This brings schools to the attention of citizens and creates a sense of community, which increases identification with the ‘own’ school and can also contribute to reducing vandalism and violence.
THE FUTURE!
Strengthening Dortmund as a scientific and innovation location We are committed to ensuring that the city of Dortmund emphasises its strength as a scientific and innovation location in its external communication even more.
The attractiveness and internationality of the city must be further increased for students, lecturers and researchers, in order to win even more expertise, creativity and variety for Dortmund.
We want to sustainably improve the working and studying conditions at Dortmund’s universities through improved transport and housing infrastructure.
Sites for student accommodation must be found and the infrastructure for cycling and public transport on the routes to the university Dortmund as a student city Dortmund has become one of the few growing cities in the Ruhr metropolis in the last ten years, not least because of the influx of students.
In order to inspire students for Dortmund, it is necessary to create an environment in which young people can participate and try things out for themselves.
For this purpose, spaces must be made available for self-managed social, cultural or artistic initiatives.
Dortmund should follow the example of popular study locations such as Leipzig and see itself as a real university and student city.
Networking of the local economy with scientific institutions We want to strengthen the exchange between the city and science and create more opportunities for the academic and extra-academic scientific and research institutions in Dortmund to engage in a constructive dialogue with the businesses in Dortmund.
We are not only looking at large industrial companies; we want to make access to science easier, especially for small and medium-sized companies and the craft sector.
To this end, we want to continuously update the Master Plan for Science and supplement it with aspects of practical social innovation.
The cooperation of the universities in the Ruhr area should be maintained and further promoted.
We support the Creative and inclusive formats for events, such as ring lectures in the city and state library or in bookshops, must therefore be found.D 4.
UNIVERSITY AND SCIENCE CITY OF DORTMUND Science and research are a driving force of our modern society.
They enable us to better understand our world and adapt to its changes.
Innovative technologies can improve the quality of life of all people and at the same time contribute to better protection of our environment.
As one of the largest university locations in Germany, the city of Dortmund cannot be considered separately from universities and universities.
In Dortmund we have the best conditions as a science location with more than 50,000 students, seven universities and around 20 non-university scientific institutions.
We are committed to bringing the scientific discourse more into the city society, because science also has social responsibility.
In order to continue the successful development of Dortmund as an international science location and important place of study, which the city has massively profited from in recent decades, the city must now also set the course for the future.
D 5.1 The markets of the future are green Shaping economic development in This includes, in particular, supporting existing companies in their efforts to become more sustainable.
The success of local companies will depend heavily in the future on how sustainably they design their working conditions, production processes and products.
New developments in the green economy offer a lot of potential for new businesses, which is why the Dortmund economic development agency should make a greater effort to attract companies with an ecological and social conscience.
Climate and environmental protection must play a much greater role in future industrial areas.
The policy of attracting new businesses begins with the provision of commercial premises.
However, we do not want to seal off valuable open spaces such as Groppenbruch, Buddenacker and Oster - schleppweg.
Companies should primarily settle in existing industrial areas and on brownfield sites.
Re-development is also an important keyword here.
Phoenix-West and the former Kokerei Hansa are good examples of how industrial culture and innovative businesses can be brought together.
Legacy issues often pose a problem for the marketing of the sites.
The state is called on to support Dortmund in the remediation of contaminated sites with the necessary subsidies.
The expansion of commercial areas should only be discussed once all available land potentials have been exhausted.
Strengthening regional economic cycles and marketing structures The development and expansion of regional economic cycles and value creation chains for food, consumer goods and services is an important component of a sustainable economy.
As part of the Ruhr metropolis, Dortmund can use its economic policy to ensure that value creation, qualified jobs and training opportunities and development prospects are created for the region.
The targeted establishment and support of regional companies will make transport, energy and supply structures more resource-friendly.
We are therefore committed to regional networking and regional marketing across all sectors.
To this end, we want to provide stronger support for cooperation between regional marketing initiatives, organic farming associations and companies that are active in regional marketing, for example in the food sector.
Supporting innovation and digitalisation We, the GREENS, want to work with companies, scientific institutions, trade unions and civil society to further develop our city as a sustainable business location for the benefit of the people who live and work here.
We see the opportunities of digitalisation for sustainable development and better reconciliation of family and This includes support for the digital transformation of business models and processes, the use of innovative and climate-friendly technologies, and the strategic anchoring of sustainability.
Existing or new initiatives by companies are to be taken up.
The aim is to D 5.
ECONOMY AND EMPLOYMENT Economic structures are subject to continuous change.
Dortmund has developed in the past ten years from a beer, coal and steel region to a diverse economic location with a good mix of small and large companies from crafts, trade, services, industry and commerce.
This puts the location in a good position in times of structural change.
Thriving neighborhoods with many innovative companies can have a great impact and create location advantages that are also useful for others.
We want to sharpen the profile of a dynamic city with good working conditions, promote cooperation and alliances, ensure the participation of citizens in the development of the location, convert old industrial areas, create unique production and living spaces together with the companies and local residents.
Sustainable and solidarity-based economic activity should be the norm from a GREEN perspective.
We want ecological industrial areas, innovative solutions for digitality We want to win innovative companies with ecological and social sustainability and with long-term economic profitability for Dortmund.
We also want to sensitize Dortmund companies to current trends and their ecological and social responsibility and make them fit for the future.
This also includes comprehensive coverage with broadband.
5.2 Infrastructure as a location factor for companies and employees Important location factors for companies are a large potential of highly qualified employees, the integration into a high-performance infrastructure – both in climate-friendly transport and in childcare and cultural offers – as well as a world-open climate in which entrepreneurs and employees can feel equally comfortable.
They make the attractiveness of our city as a place of work, business and living.
A good connection of business areas to public transport and the cycle network.
The way to work without a car must be attractive in terms of time and money.
When designating and using business areas, environmentally friendly mobility concepts must therefore be planned from the outset.
In particular, we are committed to the point-by-point expansion of the public transport offer at shift change times (also on weekends) between the main station/city and service centers These concerns must also be taken into account in cycle and local transport planning.
A smart and resource-saving transport logistics Goods are still mainly transported by lorry in Dortmund, which contributes significantly to the congestion of our roads.
In contrast to other cities, Dortmund has the opportunity to contribute to an ecologically sound transformation of freight transport.
Dortmund has one of the largest canal ports in Europe, is involved in railway companies with the Hafen AG and has an internationally renowned Fraunhofer Institute, which has decades of experience in logistics planning.
We Greens stand for the consistent use of these potentials to promote rail freight transport and the use of waterways to bundle transport.
We also understand intelligent transport logistics to mean the avoidance of unnecessary individual transport, because the journey that does not take place at all contributes the most to a healthy climate.
For deliveries to the city, we want to support the use of cargo bicycles and emission-free lorries.
Promotion of company-based childcare facilities The compatibility of work and family is a decisive location factor for the attractiveness of companies as employers.
We want to support companies in setting up company We want the start into self-employment to begin without any hurdles.
This includes a place where all information is available for the various target groups: from the birth of a business idea, through the development of a business plan, the acquisition of venture capital, the registration of a trade, to the founding of a company and further advice.
However, we want to go one step further and support new companies beyond the founding phase.
Especially in the growth phase, there is an increased need for support in securing the necessary capital, building up sales channels and operational professionalisation.
Our goal is to turn start-ups with sustainable business concepts into successful companies.
This will strengthen the economic dynamics in Dortmund.
This can be achieved with the newly planned start-up and innovation campus in Speicherstraße.
It must be ensured that all start-up offers in the city are brought together under one roof and permanently secured.
A centre for female entrepreneurs The female entrepreneur centre today mainly promotes female solo self-employment, which often carries the risk of later poverty in old age.
Therefore, we want to shift the focus of the offer to sustainably growing companies and better integrate Furthermore, stronger cooperation between the women’s entrepreneurship centre and the Centre for Entrepreneurship and Transfer at TU Dortmund (CET) can help to promote technology-oriented start-ups by women.
Migrant economy In addition to the preservation of the women’s entrepreneurship centre, we have always advocated for the appreciation and support of migrant entrepreneurs.
Their companies are an inseparable part of the local economy – not only in Nordstadt.
This development must be promoted as an enrichment of a diverse Dortmund.
The offers for all target groups are to be bundled at the start-up campus – including for migrant entrepreneurs.
The Deutsch-Internationales Wirtschaftszentrum Nordstadt (DIWN), whose existence is currently only secured until 2021, is therefore to be permanently financed and located at the start-up campus, so that these entrepreneurs can receive migration-specific advice as required.
Creative economy New ideas need spaces, infrastructure, support measures and start-up aid.
For start-up ideas in the field of the creative economy, workshops are needed to experiment and try things out.
We want Here, start-ups from the creative economy can exchange ideas, develop them further and inspire each other.
We demand close integration into local and regional economic development, cultural and urban planning departments, as well as the strengthening and expansion of the creative.Quartiere Ruhr.
Pop-up stores and coworking spaces.
We want to continue to pursue creative approaches to interim use and offers such as pop-up stores, i.e.
short-term retail outlets in empty commercial premises.
Dortmund start-ups and people from the cultural and creative economy can present their products in this context and test their possible success.
The effect on the districts is also positive when shops are not empty and changing offers revitalise the centres.
We are committed to the creation of coworking spaces in the city centre.
Such communal office spaces serve the flexibility of many employees and the compatibility of work and family, as well as climate protection.
Affordable office spaces also promote the willingness of founders and create networking in various business and cultural areas.
D 5.4 Create good jobs, combine economy and common good.
The welfare of people and the environment must be brought into harmony Our future depends directly on whether we succeed in decoupling economic growth and resource consumption.
Economic activities can have negative effects on people, society and the environment, for example through low wages and CO2 emissions.
We want to ensure that growth and competition are sustainable and fair.
Therefore, companies that handle the environment, people and society responsibly should be given preference, especially when awarding contracts to the city.
We want to create a common good balance sheet for all city-owned companies, based on the city's Public Corporate Governance Code, which defines the principles of good corporate governance.
The necessary competencies must be created to support interested companies in creating a common good balance sheet.
We want to promote sustainable and existential employment for all qualifications in Dortmund through a qualified settlement policy.
In particular, against the background of increasing digitalisation, which will not create fewer jobs, but different jobs, Dortmund must provide corresponding offers.
Offers for employment must also be created for low-qualified people.
Good training As the interface in contact with businesses and companies, the economic development agency must work together with the school and youth departments to create more training opportunities, especially for people with Existing bridge programmes in the school/vocational training transition area should be expanded.
Targeted programmes should in particular promote training in the trades.
Not all high school graduates want to go to university.
We would like to use the potential of these students to promote programmes such as “Master Craftsman instead of Master”.
D 5.5 Utilising the potential of the Ruhr metropolitan area For the economic development of the region – and thus also of the city of Dortmund – the church tower mentality must be overcome in favour of a regional economic location and a regional labour market.
Interregional cooperation, as provided for on the level of the Business Metropole Ruhr (BMR) or the Regional Association Ruhr (RVR), reduces competition between municipalities, serves the new use of industrial brownfield sites and is thus also an ecological contribution to reducing the consumption of open space.
Regional cooperation sites are an important contribution to this and should be developed further.
Companies interested in settling should also be referred to the region if no suitable site can be provided in the respective municipality.
Orders for the regional economy Activities of municipal companies that support further start-ups on site and result in All of this serves the people of Dortmund directly and indirectly.
We Greens support it when the city and the municipal companies, as well as private companies, award their contracts to local or regional small and medium-sized enterprises, provided that these companies adhere to collective agreements and the legal working and health protection.
It is a contribution to creating jobs in the city and the region and promoting investments locally.
Regionally coordinated settlement of retail trade Our inner cities must remain lively.
A good development of retail trade is an important building block for this and the basis for a pulsating public life.
In addition to an increasing online offer, uniform business types weaken the development of the city centers.
We want the cities of the Ruhr area not to see themselves as competitors, but to support each other in the revitalization of their city centers.
We are against large retail settlements in non-integrated areas and advocate a city of short distances with a diverse and good local supply.
Uniform business tax rates in the Ruhr area We want to standardize the business tax rates in the Ruhr area in order to end the competition of the cities in the region with a subsid The administration is to use its powers to a greater extent to enable Dortmund residents to deal with their official matters online, in addition to the on-site service.
In both cases, the forms must be comprehensible and usable for everyone, i.e.
both barrier-free and multilingual.
We want to use the opportunities of digitalisation and involve the citizens and the municipal employees in the process.
Further development of the service for the citizens The way in which administrative offices operate must correspond to the needs and living situations of the citizens.
At present, those who look after children in the morning, are only in Dortmund at the weekend or have to work during the day cannot easily use the citizens' services.
We therefore want to make the opening hours for the customers and thus also the working hours of the employees more flexible, also in the afternoons and on individual Saturdays.
For older and mobility-impaired people, we want to ensure that all administrative offices are accessible in a barrier-free manner.
All information must be clearly comprehensible for everyone: in all frequently occurring foreign languages and in easy language.
Important political decisions will be communicated in a comprehensible form, following the At the municipal level, we must now consistently implement digitalisation – while respecting data protection.
To this end, we want to speed up the introduction of barrier-free digital administrative procedures.
This includes further expanding the Citizens’ Portal on the Internet, in order to be able to handle more matters online and thus shorten waiting times.
We want to ensure that official and administrative matters, such as changing your place of residence or applying for child benefit, can be quickly and easily dealt with online.
Secure identification via the electronic identity card is a prerequisite for this.
D 6.2 The city as an attractive employer Municipalities are rightly expected to act as employers with a sense of public welfare and to offer good working and training conditions.
We want the public administration and municipal companies to flexibilise working hours to such an extent that family and work can be better reconciled.
Women and men should generally have the same career opportunities and career prospects; this is one of the fundamental Green objectives.
The administration and municipal companies have a role model function.
Accordingly, they should offer professional prospects, in particular, to people who have fled to Dortmund.
Good working conditions and further Dortmund’s exemplary role in training The city of Dortmund is already making an important contribution to combating youth unemployment through its training offer for school leavers of all school types and qualifications, and is setting an example for other companies.
It covers a large proportion of its personnel requirements with its own young employees.
This year, the city founded the Centre for Training and Skills (ZAK) as a central facility for this.
6.
CITY AND ADMINISTRATION Dortmund is not only the place where more than 600,000 people live.
Dortmund is also an administrative centre, an employer and a communal economic organisation.
As a municipality, Dortmund is committed to the well-being of each and every individual within this community.
The main objective of the city’s business activities is therefore the provision of essential services, from which special requirements can be derived for both its own actions and its dealings with citizens or other municipalities, as well as for its own companies and subsidiaries.
The most important point for us: Companies in the area of mandatory essential services remain under democratic control.
They do not belong in private hands – not even in parts.
We want a city that acts fairly, integratively and sustainably, that is aware of its responsibility towards its approximately 10,000 employees and that drives the expansion of digital services for the benefit of the people living here.
The training and further education of employees.
It follows the increasing demand for additional knowledge and skills, not only for trainees.
Already, a variety of training courses are offered for different school-leavers.
We support this path and want to further expand the offer for students with limited opportunities on the job market.
For this, we want to expand the already existing project to support students with Hauptschulabschlüsse, as well as introduce further special forms in addition to the planned training offer.
Women in leadership positions.
There are still too few women in leadership positions in the administration, even though the majority of employees in the city are female.
We Greens want women to be adequately represented on the upper levels.
Therefore, we want to encourage and support them to apply for leadership positions.
This is done, for example, through mentoring programs and networking.
We want the city to provide specific offers for women in this regard.
In cooperation with the Equal Opportunities Office, more programs against gender-stereotypical career choices are to be launched.
The city's own companies and subsidiaries are still far from achieving a gender-balanced distribution of positions in the supervisory boards, executive boards and management boards.
A look at the annual report shows that the positions listed there are mainly occupied by men.
We want the regulations of the NRW Equal Opportunities Act to be applied in the own companies and municipal subsidiaries and for half of the supervisory boards, executive boards and management boards to be occupied by women.
More fathers on parental leave.
Many employers still frown upon fathers taking parental leave, especially if they interrupt their employment for more than two months.
We want to convince companies that really good employers support fathers in their efforts to take half or more of the parental leave.
We want to start a campaign in the city administration and municipal subsidiaries to motivate fathers.
Updating the personnel and organizational concept.
The city of Dortmund, together with the This must be continually updated to be able to react to changing tasks and challenges, such as the shortage of skilled workers in engineering.
The concept must in particular take into account the developments through the Master Plan “Digital Administration – Working 4.0”.
We want to enable career paths through further training and additional qualifications – even at a purely professional level without personal responsibility.
Changes in tasks and activities within the entire “City Group” must be made possible and supported by appropriate training offers.
The offer of flexible working time models (including home office) is to be continually expanded with the involvement of the works council.
Healthy employees for the city In order to maintain the health of employees and reduce the sickness rate, we want to further promote occupational health management.
The city of Dortmund does not have its own occupational health service, but must instead rely on external service providers.
This results in downtime for municipal employees and delays in employment examinations.
We are advocating for the necessary occupational health services for the city administration to be provided centrally by the Dortmund Clinic, for example, and thus improved and professionalized.
The Dortmund Clinic could also offer examinations for municipal companies and participations as an occupational health center.
D 6.3 The common good is an economic factor Municipal economics must be evaluated according to more criteria than just financial economic indicators.
In addition to the classic financial statement, values must also be included and compared, which balance the social benefits of entrepreneurial action.
These include participation for all, co-determination, gender democracy, ecological sustainability or even quality of life.
The common good economy is a step towards an economic system that primarily places people at the center.
Municipal companies should be pioneers and drivers of this process.
Special criteria for municipal investments By investing public funds, cities can have a direct influence on sustainable production and socially just action.
Investments in environmentally damaging forms of energy must be excluded.
Likewise, no city money should be invested in companies that allow child labor, produce weapons of war or otherwise violate human rights.
The city as a role model: social balance sheet for municipal companies We want the municipal companies to draw up social balance sheets or to present social and ecological criteria in the financial reports on an equal footing with financial criteria.
In addition to the classic key figures, such as turnover or return, the balance sheet should be expanded to include social factors in order to reflect the overall impact of the organization on the environment and society.
This means that the success of a company is measured by its actual contribution to the well-being and performance of our society.
D 6.4 Budget – Capable of action and future-proof Municipalities need sufficient financial resources to fulfill the tasks they have to perform.
The cities have been given more and more permanent expenses in recent years, for example In the integration of people with disabilities or in the reception and integration of refugees, this has been passed on without the federal government and the state having provided the necessary counter-financing.
This means that the scope for the city's own communal political accents is becoming smaller and smaller from year to year.
The Dortmund budget, which was passed before the Corona crisis, shows a deficit of 54.3 million euros for the year 2020 and even 57.2 million euros for the year 2021.
And the city needs additional loans to fulfill its tasks, the amount of which summed up to around 1.6 billion euros in 2019.
Even with a moderate increase in interest rates or a deteriorating economic situation, Dortmund would be in financial difficulties.
There would then be no money left for the political shaping of the city.
Relief for municipalities with debts These are loans that were not only taken out to bridge short-term bottlenecks, but are also needed to compensate for permanent, structural deficits.
They should be put into a debt relief fund that allows for complete repayment after 30 years.
It is important to us that not only the municipalities, but also the federal government and the states participate in the debt relief.
After all, it is primarily the increasing tasks in the social sector that are being assigned to the municipalities without providing them with the necessary financial resources.
“He who orders the music must also pay for it”: We are therefore advocating for a consistent adherence to the principle of connection.
If the federal government or a state enacts a new law, they must also bear the additional costs.
Improved concept for a “citizens’ budget” The goal of involving the people of Dortmund in the financial prioritization of the city through a “citizens’ budget” has not worked well in the past.
Nevertheless, the “citizens’ budget” is an important instrument that has been successfully used in other municipalities to strengthen the commitment of the citizenry.
The citizens have a Municipal procurement of goods and services has an impact on many areas and is a decisive factor in whether climate protection targets are achieved or whether local demand promotes future-oriented developments.
Sustained commitment to greater sustainability Since 2007, Dortmund has been committed to fair and sustainable procurement, and since 2009 it has borne the title of “Fairtrade Town”.
We want all tendering and procurement to consistently apply the social, ecological and fair criteria enshrined in the procurement regulations.
We expressly support the Dortmund approach, which retains strict adherence to the old code of conduct on fairness in procurement.
At the request of the Greens, in future, criteria for promoting women and reconciling work and family life will also be taken into account in tenders and the awarding of municipal contracts.
This recognises the commitment of companies that offer, for example, flexible working hours, support their employees in caring for dependents or explicitly encourage women to apply for training and jobs in male-dominated occupations.
We want to ensure that in future, the location and Greater citizen participation Citizen participation is a matter of course for us Greens in local politics and is institutionalised in many places in Dortmund.
Whether it is the development of new residential areas, densification or urban development: conflicts arise above all when citizens have the impression that politics and administration are not discussing goals and means of urban development with them.
We want the city to actively seek dialogue with affected citizens and their civil society organisations in the case of potentially critical decisions.
We want to use the knowledge of many for planning and decision-making processes in good time, so that better thought-out, accepted and therefore faster solutions can be found.
The participation formats should appeal to as many population groups as possible and make their participation possible.
In addition, the time and place of the event should be chosen so that as many citizens as possible can participate and the content can be viewed digitally at any time and commented on.
In order to intensify transparency and participation, we demand the establishment of the position of a participation officer.
The person can coordinate the work of the district committees and the council, but also act as a contact person for citizens.
All participation formats should be collected and published centrally, so We are committed to ensuring that all people benefit equally from the positive aspects.
In order to make the diverse opportunities of the digital transformation usable, we must shape this transformation.
At the center of our focus are a sustainable, digital infrastructure, free and equal access to the network for all, the protection of our privacy and our personal data, for example, through the highest IT security standards, as well as a modernized administration.
This enables free action in the network, innovations and fair competition.
However, we must not forget those who do not have digital access.
We must continue to guarantee them “analog” access to public services and benefits.
Expansion of the Open Data Portal and use of open source software.
The Dortmund city administration collects large amounts of non-sensitive data: statistical data, environmental data, infrastructure data, traffic data or geodata.
The open and structured access to these freely available data sets is an important contribution to the further development of a knowledge-based society and an increasing location factor for business settlements.
Dortmund has already decided in 2018 in connection with the Master Plan “Digital Administration” to introduce Open Data, among other things, in order to strengthen the We demand the use of open source software and open standards.
This promotes digital sovereignty and strengthens the crisis security of the city of Dortmund.
We use open source software to promote transparency, data protection and the right to informational self-determination in data processing.
We want to make digital participation barrier-free and accessible, so that citizens can reach the city of Dortmund with the software and the end device of their choice.
This is achieved on a technical level by open standards.
We support the goals of the campaign “Public Money, Public Code”, so that public money becomes public goods.
Free Wi-Fi for the city centre and district centres Digital participation is a central issue of justice, as access to the internet is becoming essential for more and more areas of life.
In order to enable more people to access the internet, we are committed to making free internet available to everyone in the city centre and district centres.
Digitalisation in the interests of employees The digitalisation of the world of work is a major challenge for everyone.
We, the Greens, want to actively shape it for the benefit of people.
We want to take advantage of the opportunities of flexibilization.
In order to ensure a humane work design in a digitalized world, the rights of employees, especially the protection of employee data and occupational health and safety, must be consistently observed.
The opportunity to complete work early in the evening because it fits better into one's daily routine is countered by the danger that emails must be checked automatically in the early evening.
Even in a digitalized world, there must be an analog evening break.
We see the chance, through new technology, to further develop social and labor standards.
We welcome the digitalization strategy that has been initiated and will actively support it while observing the legal co-determination rules and involving the employee representatives.
Employment is not only an indispensable economic factor, but also an instrument of social participation.
This function must be given special consideration in the course of digitalization.
In order to meet the demands for professional development, we want to develop a further education strategy.
We will support the “Smart City Strategy” of the city of Dortmund in order to strengthen the quality of life of residents, make Dortmund an attractive location for investors as an innovation location and The combination of different areas, the digital and intelligent networking of systems, the bundling, strengthening and networking of entrepreneurial and scientific resources, the participation of civil society and the smart use of innovative information and communication technologies can promote the future-oriented restructuring of the city if the citizens are actively involved in the process.
We Greens demand that there must be spaces in which smart solutions are tested in order to find out with the citizens which smart possibilities are also socially acceptable and applicable.
The "Smart City Alliance" as a network of companies should channel the diverse commercial interests of the parties involved and prevent any misdevelopment.
As part of the process, it should creatively shape and control it.
In the context of "Smart City" and in cooperation with the voluntary ombudsman for data value and data ethics, the city must ensure that sensitive data is protected and not "marketed" by interest groups.
In this process, we accompany the process critically, especially with regard to the dangers of surveillance and the restriction of civil rights through the collection and networking of data.
Examples in other cities such as Vienna show that a data protection-compliant and citizen- Introducing live streaming We are committed to broadcasting public council meetings live on the internet and making them permanently accessible.
This makes political decisions more transparent and leads to a lower distance between citizens and their elected representatives.
Instrumentalisation of council meetings by right-wing extremist and right-wing populist council members is combated by clever strategies agreed with other democratic parties and an offensive exchange in the meetings – also in the stream.
We want to expand the participation rights of citizens in the meetings of the committees instead of restricting them.
In the district councils there is already a consultation hour for citizens in every meeting.
We are committed to giving members of the Integration Council, the Senior Council and the Disability Policy Network a fixed right to speak in the district councils.
The possibilities of the committee for “Citizen Services, Public Order”, suggestions and complaints are too little known to citizens.
This is shown by the low number of submissions.
We are committed to actively informing people about the possibilities for suggestions and complaints.
We are committed to introducing a consultation hour for citizens in the committee, similar to the district councils.
District Counc They have the most direct access to many citizens.
Their knowledge of the situation on the ground is of great importance in many decisions of the city council, committees and the city administration.
However, decisions of the district councils are often not adequately taken into account or not comprehensibly rejected.
We want to give the district councils more weight and create better opportunities for the elected district councils to work.
This includes the appropriate equipment with digital devices and better access to the administration's information options.
We want to introduce digital participation and examine the youth parliament.
We want the greatest possible participation of children and young people in the development of our city.
The city-wide youth forums are a good and proven instrument.
We want to discuss the additional establishment of a youth parliament in the next election period with all democratic parties and with the participation of children and young people.
We are committed to introducing further modern forms of participation, especially for young people.
In other cities there is already the project "aula".
It primarily enables students of secondary schools to develop their own ideas for the design of their school environment with the help of an online platform and didactic support, to find majorities for this and to decide on Thus, “aula” combines media education with political education and promotes the mature political participation in a digitalized world.
We want to test the model for municipal cooperation outside of schools.
Strengthening the participation of citizens Dortmund has 600,000 heads – let’s use them.
We stand for an active civil society, whose advice and decision-making we want to involve even more.
This requires early information and involvement in all planning processes, new forms of participation and the modernization of traditional formats.
We want to develop and expand new procedures that involve as many people as possible and not only those already engaged in the city’s society.
Platforms for online participation, citizen expert opinions, future workshops, online petitions and participation budgets are possible forms, as well as, for example, citizen assemblies with preliminary discussions on online platforms.
The experiences with participation processes show that predominantly politically-oriented population groups participate.
We want to involve groups of people who are not so articulate and not so involved.
That is why we are committed to finding project-based forms of participation that allow for the broadest possible participation.
Continuous citizen participation requires that all relevant information and documents are made available.
7.
TRANSPARENCY, DEMOCRACY, Who owns the city?
Of course, the citizens.
Many projects in the areas of the environment, transport, social affairs, culture and inclusion would be unthinkable without the diverse commitment of many Dortmunders.
We, the Greens, originated from citizen initiatives and support people who take responsibility and want to help shape the city society.
We are therefore committed to improving citizen participation in local politics.
At the same time, political processes must become more transparent.
We want to continue to strengthen voluntary work.
Participation processes must not be allowed to run their course without consequences, but must be transparent and continuously informed about.
The climate barometer already decided on the homepage of the city is an example of this.
Ask the city – strengthen the Freedom of Information Act Freedom of information is the right to free access to official information and a means of controlling political processes.
It can prevent corruption and increase the transparency and accountability of politics and administration.
The free flow of information from the state to the citizens strengthens and revitalizes democracy, because it makes participation possible.
Whether environmental impacts of construction projects, noise measurements, CO2 data, expert opinions on public transport or results of hygiene controls – on the basis of the Freedom of Information Act, the city must provide information and even protocols on request.
In this context, the city should be proactive and make information available on the Open Data Portal of the city.
We stand for an open and transparent administration and are committed to ensuring that all citizens in Dortmund can easily access municipal information on the basis of the law.
Strengthen voluntary work and volunteering The voluntary work of many Dortmunders in a wide variety of areas from social projects We continue to support and promote voluntary work as a valuable contribution to social and political welfare and integration.
That is why we have agreed to the introduction of the state’s voluntary service card in Dortmund.
We want to expand the benefits that this card offers.
At the same time, we want to support those volunteers who do not meet the requirements for the voluntary service card.
We want to expand this area in the next election period.
We want to promote networking among volunteers and with professionals through online platforms.
At the same time, we will ensure that no tasks from paid areas are outsourced to volunteers in order to save costs.
Our direct candidates in the electoral districts are: Electoral district 1 | Leander Schreyer | 30 | Student of spatial planning Electoral district 2 | Hannah Sassen | 24 | Student of spatial planning Electoral district 3 | Saziye Altundal-Köse | 51 | Dipl.
Social scientist Electoral district 4 | Ingrid Reuter | 63 | Freelance editor Electoral district 5 | Martina Stackelbeck | 60 | Dipl.
Economist Electoral district District planning Electoral district 10 | Friedrich Fuß | 67 years | Stage director Electoral district 11 | Klaus Sichelschmidt | 67 | Teacher Electoral district 12 | Egdar Freund | 47 years | Energy electronics technician Electoral district 13 | Vanessa Mauthe | 42 | In-house lawyer Electoral district 14 | Joachim Kern | 51 | Pharmacist Electoral district 15 | Mamadou Bobo Barry | 43 | IT systems specialist Electoral district 16 | Wolfram Frebel | 62 | Retired senior police commissioner Electoral district 17 | Pia Soldan | 29 | Journalist Electoral district 18 | Felix Ullmann | 62 | Master builder Electoral district 19 | Thomas Minor | 50 | Computer scientist Electoral district 20 | Claudia Plieth | 56 | Comprehensive school teacher Electoral district 21 | Benjamin Beckmann | 39 | Risk manager/actuary Electoral district 22 | Lisa Schultze | 2 Room planning 10 | Wolfgang Gurowietz | 66 | Diplom-Informatiker 11 | Saziye Altundal-Köse | 51 | Deputy Managing Director, Social Service Provider 12 | Dr.
Christoph Neumann | 32 | Statistician 13 | Jenny Brunner | 29 | Political Advisor 14 | Oliver Stieglitz | 50 | Employee 15 | Britta Gövert | 50 | Dipl.-Ing.
Room planning 16 | Benjamin Beckmann | 39 | Risk Manager / Actuary 17 | Hannah Sassen | 24 | Student of Spatial Planning 18 | Uwe Tietz | 58 | Urban Planner and Economist, Head of Department for Regional Development, Planning and Mobility 19 | Pia Soldan | 29 | Editor 20 | Leander Schreyer | 30 | Student of Spatial Planning 21 | Katrin Lögering | 30 | Student of Chemistry and Classics 22 | Armel Djine | 41 | Daniela Weinbörner | 37 | High School Teacher 42 | Thomas Rossen | 44 | Car Mechanic 43 | Katja Wilken | 49 | Special Education Teacher 44 | Florian Pees | 36 | Head of Youth Residential Group 45 | Susanne Lohse | 49 | Teacher 46 | Luis Hotten | 20 | Student of Civil Engineering 47 | Sabrina Oberbeckmann | 33 | Chemist 48 | Marko Unterauer | 27 | Referent 49 | Sigrun Katscher | 53 | Head of Housekeeping 50 | Thomas Minor | 50 | Diploma Computer Scientist 51 | Claudia Laneker | 52 | Foreign Language Correspondent 52 | Hannah Rosenbaum | 31 | Chemist 53 | Birgit Unger | 63 | Managing Director 54 | Jürgen Utecht | 55 | IT TechnicianTHE CANDIDATES FOR THE CITY COUNCIL Kreisverband Dortmund •