In love with Dortmund The Dortmund Programme 2025 – 2030 of the CDU Contents In love with Dortmund We as CDU candidates and candidates for the Council, the District Representations and the Office of Mayor are looking forward to shaping politics and developing our home in a sustainable way in this city and for this city and for you, the people of this city, in the years 2025 - 2030.
To this end, we would like to introduce our heads and our topics in our municipal election programme.
We want to implement a policy that brings noticeable improvements for the majority of society in dialogue with the community.
As a people's party, we have different population groups equally in view and place the majority and the middle of society at the centre of our actions.
Our value compass shows the direction: to promote the division of society, we bring interests into balance.
In accordance with our Christian attitude, every person is important to us.
For us, the great overshooting of economy, ecology and social issues are not contradictions and opposites, but three central pillars of political action, which must be brought into harmony with each other We are aware of this and that is why we are able to focus on the central issues and problems and offer solutions for them, which are then dealt with as a priority.
We are committed to the development and design of our hometown with great passion and we want the best for the future of the city in which we can live well, safely and with intact communal infrastructures.
We must consistently and structurally work on the failures of the past.
We are – probably just like you – in love with Dortmund.
This is why this election program with our goals for the city has come about and we hope to be able to convince you to give us your trust and your vote.
Regarding the structure of the election program: We name the different municipal political topics, present our fundamental attitude and then show concrete projects and measures for individual aspects of the topics that we want to implement.
But now: Have fun and get a good insight into our ideas for the development of our city in the years 2025 – 2030!
Our mayoral candidate Alexander Kalou It is a city that carries its greatest potential in its people - potential that has been stifled and not released in recent years.
I want to change that.
We are facing the challenge of making Dortmund a city that rediscovers its true strength.
A city that shows its attractiveness tangibly in everyday life - with a clean, livable city center, safe neighborhoods and prospects for everyone.
Safety and cleanliness are not luxury goods, but the basis for a good life.
The people must feel safe not only in the city center, but in all districts and neighborhoods.
No place in Dortmund should feel left behind or forgotten.
It is necessary to make the police visible again from the perspective of the people who form the foundation of our society.
The people who work, who take care of their children despite a lack of childcare places, who are active in clubs for the community and who need a functioning infrastructure.
This majority society carries our city day by day and yet their needs are overlooked.
We have to do this by putting their concerns back at the centre of attention.
I am convinced that we have everything we need in Dortmund to achieve this goal – we just need to create the right framework conditions.
This means we need more space for innovative ideas, for economic growth and social cohesion.
We need a city centre that is inviting again, with lively squares, attractive shops and safe streets.
Together we can make Dortmund a city that not only masters challenges, but in which everyone can bring out the best in themselves – regardless of their background, life path or age.
Let us fight for Dortmund to become safer, cleaner and more liveable – in all districts and boroughs.
Dortmund has the potential to become one of the best cities in Europe.
With confidence, determination and faith in what we can achieve together, yours sincerely, Alexander Kalou A strong team for Dortmund: Our candidates and candidates for pictures of the council candidates with names and constituencies promised before the last election.
We have consistently worked on this.
Word kept.
Trust, reliability and credibility are crucial political values.
The CDU’s claim is to say what we want before the election and then implement it after the election.
“Dortmund.
Future.
Shape it.” was our offer to the citizens of Dortmund for our work in the council during the last local elections in 2020.
Today we can rightly say that we have kept our word!
We have moved many future-oriented topics in our city.
We have worked day in and day out to shape the future of Dortmund for the good of the city and its people.
We were the drivers, initiators and conductors.
We took on leadership and responsibility, we got things moving, we changed topics and moderated processes successfully.
The following points from our success story are particularly noteworthy: Strengthening the role of the council  According to the municipal code, leadership and responsibility lie with the council.
The “principle of politics” applies – also in relation to the mayor and the municipal participation companies.
 The council makes fundamental decisions, not the mayor, the administration or the management of the municipal participation companies.
 The council decided on a differentiated taxation of residential and commercial properties for the purpose of preventing residential property from becoming too expensive.
Protecting scope for shaping the future  Budget surpluses of more than 500 million euros were generated.
 The STEAG shareholding was successfully sold with a profit of more than 250 million euros.
 A cover letter for an efficient personnel allocation of the administration was introduced.
 A central funding management for better acquisition of funds and faster implementation of projects was introduced.
 A new orientation of the municipal audit office was initiated.
Best possible medical care at the Dortmund Clinic  Investment subsidies from the municipal budget for the Dortmund Clinic in a total amount of 72 million euros were provided.
 Goal: To enable construction projects, such as an outpatient surgery center, and the installation of the most modern medical technology (for example PET-CT for better cancer diagnosis).
1 You can get a comprehensive overview of initiatives, applications and inquiries of our council faction in the current election period 2020 to 2025 on the Internet pages of the CDU council faction (QR code).
Dortmund is becoming smarter  “Memorandum on Digitalization 2020 – 2025”, implemented as a comprehensive digitalization strategy for Dortmund.
"Virtual citizen offices" have been created so that selected official procedures can be easily completed virtually and from home via video conference.
The climate in the city is improving.
Dortmund is becoming a sponge city: flood and overflow protection and the microclimate of our city are being improved.
Municipal funding programs for photovoltaic systems, green roofs, energy-efficient renovation, geothermal energy and surface sealing have been initiated and continued.
An ecological forestry concept has been developed and approved, which strengthens the climate resilience of our city forest.
Mobility is on the move.
A significant improvement in public transport has been achieved: the introduction of the Ringbus line 400 and the tightening of schedules on central city tram sections, which are being financed from part of the proceeds from the STEAG sale.
Road operations for the maintenance of our road infrastructure have been initiated, with which not only roads in residential areas are being renovated, but also main roads in all parts of the city are being renovated.
A unified policy against the car and motorized individual transport has been initiated.
Bicycle routes throughout the city will lead The country was called upon to apply for a funding programme to develop the former commercial areas.
The council decided to protect the existing commercial areas in Speicherstraße for the development of a digital and creative quarter.
The administration was asked to develop a municipal bureaucracy reduction programme that aims to simplify and speed up administrative procedures in order to relieve the burden on businesses.
We have always rejected new municipal bureaucratic obstacles and difficulties for Dortmund companies.
The city brand is now being managed from a single source in order to be well positioned in the competition between cities.
The image and the attractiveness of our city are being strengthened externally.
The careless treatment of the city has ended.
A comprehensive city management from a single source is being implemented that will drive the conversion of the city into lively and attractive areas for living, trade, business, education, culture and leisure.
The city is more than just a place for trade and shopping: the move of the Technical University into the Hansa Carré is therefore just as important as the continuation of proven and the introduction of new and innovative formats such as the Feierabendmarkt or cultural events in the Stadtgarten.
The new Security and order is the basis  22 additional positions have been created and filled, and the necessary equipment for the municipal order service has been secured.
 Regular cleaning of the city for a clean and attractive appearance.
 Personnel reinforcement of the disposal service to combat illegal dumping in the city.
 The subjective feeling of security has been strengthened by the action plan to eliminate fear spaces in the city.
 Zero tolerance strategy against the open drug scene in the city has been implemented.
 The drug consumption area has been moved out of the heart of the city and additional decentralized drug consumption areas have been established to divert the open drug scene into social services and out of public view.
Maintain social cohesion, leave no one behind, leave no one alone  Welfare organizations and various institutions and offers of social work have been financially supported.
 A coordination center for loneliness has been established to prevent loneliness in Dortmund, to raise awareness of the issue, to develop a city-wide strategy and to counter social isolation with suitable projects and have been and will continue to be braked by the mayor): sufficient business premises in the city; drug clinics that focus on the people affected by the negative side effects rather than on the addicts and dealers; implementation of the council decision for a housing programme that specifically provides housing for young families who are particularly hard hit by the housing market; increased activities in housing construction through connections between DOGEWO21 and Dortmunder Stadtentwicklungsgesellscha￾ft DSG; realisation of the initially failed urban development project “Smart Rhino” on Rheinische Straße; a comprehensive public transport concept as an important building block for mobility; implementation of the decision: the concept for the introduction of a “Dortmunder Familienkarte” with many benefits and rewards for all Dortmund families has been decided but is still not implemented; meanwhile, only low-income families have been entitled to the Dortmund card with a manageable range of discounts since recently; make Dortmund more family-friendly – for all families.
In contrast to other groups, we believe that a concentration solely on low-income families is too narrow.
Socially balanced and fair contributions: It is not in order if exemptions from parental contributions for childcare of lower income groups up to 42,000 euros are to be compensated for by sometimes considerable contribution increases for middle-class families who are already heavily burdened.
Our goals for Dortmund 2025 - 2030 Economic development and jobs for Dortmund A strong economy is the basis of our prosperity.
It creates jobs and training places and makes a significant contribution to improving the living conditions of all citizens through its tax payments.
The Dortmund economy has grown in recent years despite all the crises and the city has become a broadly based economic location.
Nevertheless, the unemployment rate in Dortmund is too high at 12%.
We want to continue to improve the framework conditions and adapt the economic location of Dortmund to future challenges.
To achieve this, we want to do the following: Provide business areas A basic prerequisite for a strong economy is that suitable areas are available.
The common good and individual well-being must be brought into harmony.
Therefore, these are our specific demands and goals: For a sufficient economic business area offer, it may also be necessary to make areas in the open space available for economic use.
When allocating areas, it should be ensured that, on the one hand, companies with cooperation partners are given spatial proximity and, on the other hand, mono-structures of individual commercial branches are avoided and different economic sectors are settled.
Existing land use plans should be reviewed in this regard.
New areas for the settlement of logistics companies will no longer be made available.
The port as an industrial location and the largest canal port in Europe should be maintained and further developed (see chapter Flowing, sustainable and safe mobility.
Inter-communal cooperation should be strengthened in view of the small number of available areas.
The project “newPark” in Dortmund, which is being implemented with the participation of the city of Dortmund, will be realized.
The development of the former HSP area must be driven forward and supported, as must the municipal acquisition of the remaining areas “Area 5” and “Kaiserstuhl” on the Weserbergland site.
Existing commercial and industrial areas must be strengthened, secured and, where possible, expanded.
Existing Support through planning measures.
Supporting company foundations.
The business world is constantly changing.
Therefore, it is important to support not only existing companies, but also new companies on their way.
We place a special value on the establishment of companies in the field of new technologies, spin-offs from universities and start-ups, but also on good conditions for the craft industry.
To this end, we want to:  Provide free-standing areas and spaces for start-ups.
 Encourage students and students to start a business through counselling.
 Special support for company foundations, for example in the form of a start-up centre or the provision of free-standing areas and commercial premises in all parts of the city (see chapter Dortmund as a city of science).
 Simplify the registration of businesses by bundling responsibilities in the city administration, networking and offering them from a single source.
 Process applications for changes in the use of buildings more quickly in order to prevent long-term vacancies.
Targeted support for individual economic sectors.
Different economic sectors have different requirements for successful business operations.
In addition to the general framework conditions, the conditions for individual economic sectors must also be taken into account.
Therefore we want to:  Further develop city management and promote city centres.
 Develop a modern concept for the Dortmund weekly markets.
 Make the city centre more accessible from outside Dortmund by means of express bus lines (see chapter on smooth, sustainable and safe mobility).
 Develop the city centre and local centres into places where people can live, work, shop, enjoy culture and dine.
 Maintain and expand Dortmund as a popular venue for events, congresses and trade fairs in the region.
 Focus on clusters of individual sectors (for example IT) support and settle clusters of potential and sustainable enterprises.
The potential of universities and research institutions should be more strongly integrated.
 Develop the Union district in the area of Rheinische Straße with the already existing pub and restaurant scene into a nightlife district.
 Involve local craft businesses in the scope of legal possibilities in (construction) tenders.
 Ensure the supply of energy-intensive businesses (see chapter Efficient emergency care for citizens).
Attract skilled workers.
A strong economy needs qualified workers – from executives to employees entrusted with simple tasks.
Therefore, Dortmund must be an attractive place to work.
Targeted immigration also offers significant opportunities.
Therefore, we want:  To bind graduates of universities and vocational schools to the location of Dortmund.
 Further develop the Azubiwohnheim (DOzubi plus) for out-of-town trainees.
 Support projects with exemplary character for student living in the north of the city.
 Cooperate more closely with the Studierendenwerk to create more affordable housing for students.
 Work with local employers to establish more company-run nurseries.
 Support legally immigrated persons in obtaining work permits by improving the necessary municipal administrative processes (see chapter: Shaping migration through rules and integration).
Integrate the unemployed.
Unemployment is not only a personal tragedy, but also a loss of valuable workforce for society.
Our focus is therefore on combating unemployment.
To this end, we want to:  Create prospects for long-term unemployed persons through targeted qualification measures and support in the job market, but at the same time not develop a permanently subsidised social job market.
We consider the concept of “support and demand” to be necessary.
 To accompany municipal labour market promotion in order to prevent distortions of competition in comparison to private businesses through publicly funded competition.
 And to work towards making the transition from publicly funded positions to permanent positions easier.
Dortmund as a city of science: Dortmund has 7 universities, 19 other research institutions as well as the Technology Centre Dortmund, in which scientific innovations are directly converted into business.
Dortmund is therefore one of the largest university and science locations in Germany.
Our demands and goals for this area are: • Programmes from the Master Plan for Science 2.0 should be implemented and a Master Plan for Science 3.0 should be developed.
• Support for universities in terms of their visibility in public spaces (for example through events and rooms in the city centre, increased signage and public recognition of outstanding research achievements).
• Stronger networking between the city and universities (for example through cooperative projects and regular exchange between the administration and existing research institutions).
• Special support for the founding of companies by young academics, for example in the form of a founders' allowance or the development of free-standing areas and green spaces in all parts of the city (see chapter Economic development and jobs for Dortmund).
• Further develop and expand the TechnologieZentrumDortmund.
• The KITZ.do, which contributes to earlier scientific orientation and learning experiences.
• Use the networking of the universities via the Ruhr Alliance for more extensive inter-municipal cooperation.
• Promote Dortmund as a place of study, for example by expanding the housing offer in general and by supporting the Studierendenwerk in the construction of further student accommodation (see chapter Adequate housing for all citizens).
• Expand public transport (for example by connecting student accommodation and setting up shuttle buses that connect the city centre and the campus directly with each other during peak times, as well as the implementation of the connection of the H-Bahn as an autonomous transport system to the tram network) (see chapter Smooth, sustainable and safe mobility).
Adequate housing for all citizens Dortmund is the central city of the Ruhr area with around 600,000 inhabitants.
It is a growing city with its cultural and educational offerings, its many green spaces and its job and shopping opportunities.
We want to be prepared for this and ensure that adequate and affordable housing is available for all citizens.
No one should have to leave Dortmund because they cannot find housing that meets their needs.
To achieve this, we are pursuing the following measures: Housing construction should be promoted.
The basic prerequisite for adequate and affordable housing is that there is enough of it in all market segments (i.e.
both in rental housing and in the construction of owner-occupied homes, terraced and semi-detached houses and detached houses).
Housing construction plays a decisive role in this.
Therefore we want to:  Fast planning and quick approval procedures for housing construction (development plans should be approved within a maximum of 6 months).
3 years, building permits after a maximum of 3 months).
 Streamline the approval process and make greater use of legal provisions and discretionary powers.
 Operate a land reserve policy to ensure that housing construction is also possible in the future.
 Identify areas for new building developments.
 Not only grant ground leases but also sell urban properties.
 Establish a municipal real estate fund that invests in affordable housing as an investment form.
 Facilitate the conversion of previously used properties (especially vacant commercial premises) into residential properties.
 To enable young families to find housing in Dortmund, we are establishing a housing construction programme specifically for young families with the aim of creating 2,500 suitable residential units during the election period.
Sanitise and preserve existing housing The aim of ensuring that there is sufficient housing in stock cannot be achieved solely by building new homes and houses if existing housing is not also preserved and – where necessary – renovated.
It may also be appropriate to expand existing residential buildings.
Therefore we want to:  Consistently take action against landlords of problem properties who abandon their properties.
Initiate changes in individual areas through a renovation ordinance.
Continue to facilitate densification, gap closure and expansion in existing areas.
We are particularly concerned that citizens can realize their own housing preferences.
Families with children have different requirements for living space and living environment than single people, young people have different requirements than old people.
However, a change of social environment is often associated with hurdles, especially in old age.
We want to help ensure that everyone finds suitable living space.
Therefore, our goals are: Establish a city-wide platform for housing exchange.
Provide incentives for older home and apartment owners to sell their properties to young families and at the same time find other suitable living space.
Provide age-appropriate and barrier-free housing options, if necessary.
In combination with additional subsidies, offered in all municipalities.
Encouraging home ownership Owning your own home and your own apartment is still a life goal for many people.
It is a focal point of life and a good way to provide for old age.
Unfortunately, this wish is not being fulfilled for more and more people.
We must counteract this in Dortmund.
Therefore, we want to offer the possibility of realizing the dream of owning your own four walls by providing suitable plots of land.
We want to start an initiative with the federal government and the state to lower the property transfer tax or increase the tax-free allowances.
We want to introduce rent-to-own models in municipal housing companies.
With the goal of reducing construction-related costs, we want to start an initiative with the federal government to reorganize the fee schedule for notaries.
Making residential areas more attractive The availability of living space does not end at the front door.
The environment plays a significant role in whether people perceive their living space as livable.
To achieve this, we want to: 

- Ensure that new building areas are well connected to public transportation.
- Connect building areas more strongly to the bicycle network.
- Expand the charging infrastructure for electric mobility in residential areas (see chapter on fluid, sustainable and safe mobility).
- Regulate social housing construction in a visible and not fixed quota-based manner in order to ensure social mixing of residential areas.
- Develop the Nordstadt with its often diverse building substance into Kreuzviertel 2.0.
Living sustainably and in a sustainable manner Where people live, nature is integrated and energy is needed.
Making this as environmentally friendly as possible is a matter of course for us as a Christian party.
Therefore, we want to promote and support municipal support programs for: 

- The energy-efficient renovation of houses and the renovation of house facades and green roofs.
For autonomous energy supply in residential areas, for example through photovoltaics, block heating stations and heat pumps.
To protect properties from flooding and heavy rainfall events (see chapter Pragmatic and effective environmental policy for Dortmund).
Pragmatic and effective environmental policy for Dortmund Environmental protection and the adaptation of the city of Dortmund to changing climatic conditions are necessary.
We can all see the increase in heavy rainfall, “century” floods and heat waves.
For us as the CDU, it is essential that ecology, economy and social issues are not played off against each other, but rather form the guiding principle for sustainability.
We need a healthy environment, a city adapted to the consequences of climate change, a healthy economy, as well as sustainable and viable social structures (see chapter Economic development and jobs for Dortmund & chapter Dortmund as a city that holds together).
Pushing forward environmentally conscious urban planning Municipal planning decisions have a significant impact on how we as people can continue to live well in the city on the one hand with the consequences of climate change and on the other hand can make a contribution to reducing environmentally harmful emissions.
Our demands and goals in the area of urban design are:  Less greenhouse gas emissions and the goal of zero emissions by 2050 and the striving for the agreed goal of a climate-neutral city by 2035.
 Continuing to pursue and implement measures to make Dortmund a "sponge city".
 The noise action plan with different measures to reduce noise, continue to be developed.
 A "green band" from north to south through the city, which also happens through the development of areas.
 Parks of different sizes as green lungs to be preserved and expanded and to support, for example, urban gardening projects.
 The goal "No street is without a tree" to be pursued.
 As a measure against the use of fountains and water features throughout the city, to build them as a countermeasure.
In densely populated centers, additional drinking water fountains should be installed.
 The roofs of waiting shelters at bus stops should be green.
This must be taken into account when awarding a contract for  To make heating possible with less CO2 emissions, for example expand the district heating network.
 To use and promote the possibilities of geothermal energy more intensively.
 To set aside areas for photovoltaics and to cover a (initially) heavily frequented cycle path with a photovoltaic system.
 To check and, if necessary, use the possibilities of “solar roofs” over parking lots of shopping centres or event locations.
 To implement the agreed measures for energy-efficient renovation of urban buildings.
 To build traffic islands that should be sealed and green next to the sidewalk.
 To use climate-friendly building materials in urban construction.
 To take consistent action against pest infestation (for example oak processionary moth) and against the spread of invasive plants (for example Great burdock).
Residents support environmental protection and climate adaptation Not only the city can and must make a contribution to environmental protection and adaptation to climate change - everyone is called upon to make a contribution.
However, the city can support and support through special funding.
Our demands and goals in this area are:  Funding programs for intensive facade, backyard and front garden landscaping  Strengthen the allotment gardening through cooperation between the city and associations as well as the expansion of additional allotment gardens.
 Create an online directory of fruit trees on municipal grounds (for example Schoolyards or orchards) that can be harvested by residents and develop a Dortmund version of the "Edible City" project.
Prepare for heavy rainfall and high temperatures Climate change is particularly noticeable through more heavy rainfall or heat than we are used to from earlier times.
The city and all people in it must be prepared for this in a special way.
Our demands and goals in this regard are:  Take extraordinary natural events seriously and use early warning systems.
Here is a close cooperation beyond the city limits  Carry out public campaigns on the topics of "behaviour in the heat" (for example self-protection measures and designation of heat protection areas), "risk factors for damage in heavy rain" (for example external uncovered basement stairs; objects that can become projectiles) and "behaviour in heavy rain" (for example self-protection measures and point of contact that coordinates voluntary helpers) (see chapter For a safe and clean place to live  Create possibilities for shade on large squares in the city centre and on playgrounds throughout the city (for example retractable sun sails or fixed roofs).
 Intensify the development of the city as a sponge city and also unseal sealed areas.
This applies, for example, to areas such as schoolyards and outdoor areas of kindergartens.
Flowing, sustainable and safe mobility The long-term increase in cars per inhabitant has long led to conflicts in the limited road space.
Decades of neglect of infrastructure investments can be seen on the city's streets.
Mobility is changing - even in Dortmund.
Our ideal is that all people should be able to move quickly with the means of transportation of their choice, according to their needs, and that both the interaction with other road users and the burden on the environment should be as low as possible.
Traffic planning should not fundamentally prefer one means of transportation over another.
The city must therefore also be accessible by car in the future.
In order to implement this, pragmatic and creative regulations are needed.
Infrastructure must be brought up to date and modernized.
Every form of mobility is dependent on intact and safe infrastructure.
Due to the desolate state of the infrastructure, in which too little has been invested over decades, we must act in a structured and goal-oriented manner - but we cannot expect miracles in the shortest possible time.
Improvements are necessary in all areas of transportation, cycle paths, sidewalks, public transport, as well as in the technical area for more efficient land use.
Our demands and goals in the area of infrastructure are: The existing backlog of repairs will be gradually cleared.
 Organisational measures will be taken to maintain the good condition of already repaired transport routes.
 Fast construction and repair work by working at night and on weekends.
 A sidewalk repair programme to repair and improve accessibility.
 The bridge repair programme will be implemented as usual.
 Efficient use of road surfaces through intelligent control (for example different number of lanes released per direction depending on need; digital traffic control systems).
 The principle of “planning from the kerb to the kerb” applies to the planning of the allocation of traffic routes.
 We are firmly opposed to a 30 km/h speed limit on all inner-city roads.
The 50 km/h speed limit should continue to be the standard speed limit on the core network of main traffic routes.
The installation of noise-reducing asphalt can be just as much a required alternative to the establishment of a 30 km/h speed limit on main roads as speed limit 40.
Traffic lights should be set to create more “green waves” with appropriate signage.
Countdown timers should be installed to make waiting at pedestrian crossings more transparent, increasing safety and improving comfort for pedestrians.
Roundabouts should be further developed with a view to good visibility between car, bicycle and pedestrian traffic.
Further Park & Ride facilities should be established by using new areas or extending existing areas through the construction of car parks.
Parking garages should be established in areas with high parking pressure as a reliable parking option.
Safe bicycle parking facilities should be built at public transport stops (Bike & Ride).
Public transport should be further developed in a more sustainable way and adapted to demand: frequency increases and expansion of routes according to demand, for example in the outskirts of the city and in new developments, as well as in neighbouring municipalities; use of smaller vehicles on less popular routes and at off-peak times; on-dem  Create the framework conditions for the ability to work as a bus and tram driver as a part-time job to attract staff.
 Realise the already agreed cycle routes in the whole city as soon as possible and create a digital map.
 Lead cycle paths, particularly on side roads, which can sometimes also be cycle roads or cycle zones.
 We reject cycle paths along main roads and the associated loss of lanes for individual traffic – also for safety reasons.
 Convert a parking level or a shop building in the city centre into a bicycle parking area, where not only normal bicycles and e-bikes but also cargo bikes can be parked safely and securely.
 Promote the construction of bicycle garages in residential areas (especially in courtyards).
 Establish resident parking zones with broad citizen participation.
We reject excessively high fees for resident parking permits, as in other cities.
 Increase traffic safety at intersections by expanding the colour markings of cycle paths and installing more bicycle traffic lights.
 Mixed traffic areas in the city centre should be examined, which allow a direct crossing of the city by bike or electric small vehicles.
 Where possible, a separation of bike and pedestrian paths should be established, which increases the safety of both.
However, shared areas are better than the absence of a bike or pedestrian path.
 Evaluate measures that have been implemented for environmental protection (for example Temp 30 on the Ruhrallee and environmental lane in Brackel).
These measures will be retained if they are really useful.
 Realisation of the following road construction and expansion projects: Hoeschallee/Completion of the North Spur; South Spur Phoenix-West; Full connection of the Weserallee to the OWIIIa; Further construction of the OWIIIa in the east of Dortmund, six-lane expansion of the A45 on Dortmund city territory.
Special types of mobility require attention Mobility of children and young people is a different factor for their independence, but requires a special look at safety aspects.
Furthermore, air and ski traffic in Dortmund require special attention.
Our dem  Support the airport in its current state (operating hours, runway).
We support the improvement of the use of the existing infrastructure, such as the relocation of the landing strips.
This also applies to the classification of the airport as a regional airport.
 Maintain the port as an economic, industrial and logistics location, implement the plans for the “Digital Campus” in the port and continue to develop residential uses in the port (see chapter Economic Development and Jobs for Dortmund).
Promote environmentally friendly mobility.
The transport sector is one of the areas that has the greatest impact on the environment.
Therefore, measures for an environmentally friendly conversion are particularly helpful here.
However, alternatives to private cars must be attractive: We want to advertise the alternatives, but not impose them on people politically.
Our demands and goals for environmentally friendly mobility are:  Encourage the use of public transport by introducing tickets at special prices, for example 1€ for certain days and events (for example Sales Sundays, Christmas markets, GourmetDo, etc.).
 Simplify the ticket structure in accordance with the VRR (for example Student tickets for everyone, regardless of place of residence – school; free transport of bicycles).
 Promote climate-neutral drives (for example Water-stopping) and expand the use of electric drives in bus transport if appropriate funding is made available by the state or federal government.
 Start campaigns for the use of carsharing, especially where parking space is lacking.
In cooperation with residents, special carsharing parking spaces can be set up in the case of agreements.
 Expand the charging infrastructure for e-cars and e-bikes.
For a safe and clean Dortmund The citizens of our city expect a safe and clean Dortmund.
Safety and order in public spaces and protection against criminal activity are indispensable for people to feel comfortable in the city.
Litter and graffiti on public areas and a poor state of the cityscape are evidence of inadequate negligence, which we will not accept.
The CDU stands like no other party for security, order and cleanliness.
Therefore, we want to achieve the following for Dortmund: Strengthen the Order Service The work of the municipal order service is central to ensuring security and order.
Because law and order only prevail where they are actively implemented.
Therefore, it is important to support the order service with a sufficient equipment.
Our goals and demands in this area are: If the result of the audit is positive, the introduction of a municipal dog estate for the municipal order service.
Improve cooperation between the order service and the police.
The municipal order service is not the only guarantor for security and order in our city.
That is why it is important that it works well with other actors, especially the police.
Since the police and the order office have different powers, mutual competence supplementation in joint action leads to greater success.
We want to achieve this through the following measures: • Joint priority operations of police and order service against organized crime • The House of Youth Justice as the responsible authority in the case of minor offenses • Active participation in the Ruhr Security Cooperation.
• Joint patrols of the municipal order service with dog units in the police.
Combat drug crime Drug trafficking and consumption have increased very strongly in the common cityscape in recent years.
This is accompanied by accompanying criminality and other undesirable behavior, such as theft and aggressive behavior.
The interests of the majority of the city society, whose protection and the clear improvement of the quality of life in the city are at the center of our concerns.
We are therefore Therefore we want: • To combat ordinary drug consumption through controls and sanctions.
• To reintroduce the requirement to register a place of residence, so that the drug consumption area does not attract addicts from the entire Ruhr area to Dortmund.
• To take a firm stance against aggressive behaviour, ordinary storage and camping, as well as the trade in drugs.
• To create a decentralised structure for drug consumption areas, in order to relieve the city centre – and at the same time ensure that additional consumption areas do not lead to more trade and consumption.
• To close the drug consumption area in the city centre and move it to the Treibstraße.
• Drug consumption areas must not be located near places that are regularly visited by particularly vulnerable members of our society, such as children and young people.
• To entrust the management of the environment around the drug consumption areas with the protection of the environment and not primarily the care of individual drug users.
• To expand the range of offers for rapid drug advice for “leavers”.
• To establish prohibition zones in the city centre for socially harmful forms of behaviour.
Monitoring of public spaces – use video surveillance.
Security and order can only In addition to reports from the public, it is essential to carry out checks of public spaces.
Therefore, we want to: • Take the initiative to increase the use of video surveillance in areas with a high crime rate.
• Use sensor technology to protect playgrounds and schoolyards at night using IT-supported technology.
Protection for particularly vulnerable groups, such as women, children and young people, and the elderly, must be strengthened.
Measures must be taken to protect them so that they can live as untroubled and free of fear as possible and move around in public.
Specifically, we demand:  The women's emergency call service must be introduced on a permanent basis.
 An app with an SOS radio function should be introduced for quick contact with local emergency services.
 A home-return telephone service should be set up for the safe return home in the dark evening hours.
 In particular, pregnant women, children or people with bladder weakness need a good offer of easily accessible and safe toilets.
We will evaluate the results of the projects introduced for this purpose and make sure that the offers are available in the Citizens' participation in the police department is in order.
The police department serves the citizens.
The citizens know best where security and order can be improved in our city.
Therefore, it is appropriate to involve them sufficiently in police department planning.
To this end, we want to: • Develop and implement the Municipal Security Master Plan 2.0 in cooperation between the city, other authorities and citizens.
• Involve citizens in police department planning and involve them in a structured and organized way.
• Promote networking in the immediate living environment and support the initiative of vigilant neighborly relations.
Preventing illegal dumping Illegal dumping is a serious problem.
Organized waste disposal is a fundamental pillar of civilized society (see chapter Efficient Provision of Public Services for Citizens).
It depends on everyone participating and following the rules.
Therefore, the CDU has declared war on illegal dumping.
To this end, we want to: • Provide the Environmental Investigation Service with sufficient staffing on a permanent basis.
• Promote the use of modern investigation methods in waste disposal services.
• Consequentially punish waste crimes in the case of a perpetrator.
• Increase the activity of recycling centres by extending opening hours.
• Make the app for easier use of bulky waste disposal widely known.
• Place more waste containers in public spaces that are sufficiently large and closed.
Strengthen the sense of security The sense of security of people is significantly influenced by their environment.
Therefore, we want to meet the needs of people through forward-looking urban planning and the design of public spaces.
To this end, we want to: • Illuminate public places well and use intelligent, energy-efficient lighting.
• Define “avoiding fearful spaces” as a criterion in all measures of urban planning and design and eliminate existing fearful spaces.
• Regularly maintain public places and green spaces throughout the city.
• Quickly eliminate illegal dumps and pollution in public spaces.
Improve disaster protection Floods, fires and other natural disasters repeatedly show us how important it is to have forward-looking disaster protection – it can save lives in an emergency.
The city must therefore be well prepared to prevent disasters if possible, but in any case to keep the damage as low as possible.
To this end, we want to: • Continue to provide the fire department with modern equipment and sufficient personnel as required.
• Support research facilities of the fire department to drive the development of technical equipment forward.
• Support disaster protection associations such as THW and DLRG.
• Inform citizens in a targeted manner about self-protection measures (see chapter Pragmatic and effective environmental policy for Dortmund).
Dortmund as a city that sticks together All people are different, and yet the dignity of every person is inviolable.
Not all people have the same opportunities in life or take the same path.
In a solidary and social society, support and help is provided to those who need it.
Our policy is based on Christian social teaching.
As much as we care for the needs of the people in this city: it is important to prevent Dortmund from becoming a magnet for people with major problems, even from the surrounding cities.
Therefore, our goals are: to enable people in need to find a way out of their situation.
Social inequality will always exist.
Nevertheless, it is a social task not to let it become too big and to enable people in need to find a way out of their situation.
Specifically, we set ourselves the goal and demand:  To intensively and appropriately provide homeless aid in cooperation with providers and volunteers.
No one should freeze on the streets of Dortmund.
The approach of combating homelessness with “Housing First” is to be understood.
 Drug aid as help for addicts and help for those affected by addiction (for example Dealers in the city or passers-by) must be provided to the same extent (see chapter For a safe and clean Dortmund).
The best addiction help is to avoid addiction.
Intensive prevention programmes should be supported and the authorities should ensure that the drug scene is not tolerated in the vicinity of places used by particularly vulnerable people (such as schools and playgrounds) (see chapter For a safe and clean Dortmund).
Social inequalities are still passed on from generation to generation.
The aim is therefore to compensate for educational disadvantages.
This requires a school development plan that takes into account the social index and provides for the smallest possible classes, especially in areas with major challenges, and a building policy that meets this requirement (see chapter Good education for people in Dortmund).
People are dependent on each other for a successful coexistence of all people in the city.
As social beings, people need other people around them to be able to lead a happy life.
Even though many people live in a city like Dortmund, loneliness is a major problem in this day and age – people live easily past each other.
To promote living together, we are committed to the following goals: In all municipalities, spaces must be preserved and, if necessary, created, in which people can meet.
Where traditional institutions are breaking down or churches and associations are no longer able to reach parts of society, public forums, meeting points and community centres can provide an alternative and, not least, counteract loneliness.
 Without voluntary work, society cannot function.
The task of the city is to secure the conditions for voluntary work (for example Reducing bureaucratic effort wherever possible; making advice available at the volunteer agency) and to honour the work done (for example Advertising the voluntary work card and recognising special projects) (see chapter on promoting and involving children, young people and the elderly).
 Doing sport together or making music together is a good motor for integration and cohesion.
Therefore, the many offers of sports clubs, music schools, the theatre and concert hall must also be seen as programmes for the social cohesion of the city (see).
Chapter on top-level and grassroots sport in Dortmund & Chapter on Dortmund as the capital of culture and leisure in the Ruhr area).
Shaping migration through rules and integration Migration is one of the major challenges, but it can also be a great opportunity for the future.
The influx of many people in recent years has presented our city with major challenges, particularly in the area of school and kindergarten provision and on the housing market.
A permanent task is to prevent the emergence of parallel societies.
At the same time, we need many qualified workers, which means that targeted immigration from abroad is necessary.
The CDU is facing up to this challenge of immigration, without ignoring abuses or pandering to prejudices.
We therefore want: To enforce rules Migration can only work if there are rules.
We therefore do not want to accept any kind of immigration into our society – the rule of law and the fundamental values of our society are a matter of course for us.
Specifically, we demand:  Adequate staffing of the foreigners' registration office to carry out residence permit procedures quickly.
 Improved structures for the consistent  Modernise the foreigners' authorities digitally in order to improve communication with other authorities and municipalities.
 Introduce the payment card and introduce rules that prevent the circumvention of the card so that social benefits cannot be misused.
Integration promotes Many people who have come to us want to integrate.
They naturally want to work, adhere to our rules and become part of our society.
We must support these people.
Therefore we want:  To strengthen civic engagement and voluntary work as the hinge of participation.
 To promote the integration of migrants into sports clubs.
 To support local integration networks as an important building block of integration.
 To provide sufficient and high-quality language and educational offers; existing offers and courses must be evaluated with regard to their effectiveness and success and, if necessary, adapted.
Naturalisation applications with good integration performance should be processed and decided quickly.
Offers for value and cultural education for children and young people with a migration background should be made.
The cultural identity of the home country should be kept in mind and supplemented, not replaced.
Any conflicting experiences and expectations should be discussed with those affected.
Children and young people should be quickly integrated into childcare and school structures; if school places are not immediately available, they should receive a bridging offer.
Integration readiness demands integration is not a one-way street.
It cannot succeed if only the majority society is given a duty to bring.
The immigrants must also make their contribution, which we will demand.
Therefore we want: For us, the German language is the key to successful integration.
 Participation in compulsory integration courses must be consistently enforced.
 Compliance with school attendance is monitored and violations will be consistently punished.
Immigration of workers is necessary to enable a functioning economy.
A functioning economy needs qualified workers.
It is a reality that many jobs can no longer be filled.
Here, targeted immigration can be part of the solution.
It must be our goal to quickly get the people who are legally living here into work.
Therefore we want:  To develop a recruitment strategy for skilled workers in cooperation with our business community.
 To quickly recognize foreign professional and educational qualifications.
 To offer timely language support for skilled workers who have immigrated.
Good education for people in Dortmund Education is a lifelong task and does not only take place in school.
Nevertheless, school is the most important place of education where all children and young people spend many hours of their time over many years in this city.
In urban responsibility, there are also extracurricular educational offers, for example in adult education.
Education is the central key for the social and individual development opportunities.
In order to organize and support this as best as possible, we are working in these areas: to make school structures and buildings fit for the future children and young people are different and have different needs.
The multi-level school system, which enables both majority learning in the comprehensive school as well as learning differentiated according to performance in main and secondary schools as well as grammar schools and, in addition to inclusive learning, also the education in explicit special schools, offers everything that they need and prefer.
All these schools are united by the need for sufficient, intact and functional school space.
The schools in this city must be places that are worth visiting.
Therefore, our goals and demands in this area are: • to renovate and expand schools according to the school development plan quickly so that all children and young people can get a school place close to their home.
• to renovate school buildings that are still usable and adapt them to • All existing school types and the freedom of choice for families are to be maintained.
This includes special schools, which are to be expanded as needed.
• Schools are not to be expanded beyond 6 parallel classes.
This requires the quickest possible establishment of a new grammar school.
• Class sizes are to be reduced and the rules set by the state for the maximum class size are to be adhered to.
• Places in existing after-school programs are to be expanded with the least possible double use of classrooms in the leisure time of the school day.
Ensure good equipment of schools.
Schools are more than just buildings.
All people who work and learn there, parents who contribute to the school community or providers who are connected to the school from the outside, make the school unique.
Equipment nowadays also includes a look at digital media and the possibilities of content-related provision.
Our demands and goals for this are: • Develop a sustainable digitalization strategy to meet current learning needs with and through digital media.
The enormous resource consumption for the end devices as well as the high costs for new and replacement equipment must also be taken into account.
A further expansion of support structures for teachers in administration and use is part of this strategy.
• Design a full-day offer that is educationally effective and includes activities for children and offers from clubs and churches.
Parents must be informed by education partners of the schools and have a freedom of choice as to which offers their children participate in.
• Promote special school programs, for example the NRW sports school (Goethe Gymnasium) and a cultural school.
Organization and administration of schools must be improved.
Teachers should primarily take care of teaching and parents should have the easiest and most reliable contact with the school possible.
Our concrete demands and goals in this area are: • Simultaneous and digital registration at all schools, including in class 1 and class 5, where not only one school can be chosen, but also the option of a second choice is possible.
• School social work is an important task in the current time, in which many students carry burdens that hinder their learning.
In shared responsibility with the state government, we are advocating for a further expansion of these positions.
• Appropriate expansion of secretarial positions to ensure reliable comparability of schools and to relieve teachers of administrative tasks.
• Simplify the application process for school support, for example.
Help for children must not be thwarted by complicated administrative procedures.
The school environment must be made safe and secure.
The school route and schoolyard are essential spaces for children and young people, where they should feel safe and comfortable.
At the same time, they are also learning spaces.
Our demands and goals with regard to the school environment are: • Measures to secure school routes, such as the establishment of school streets and the implementation of the project “This is how we walk” (see chapter on smooth, sustainable and safe mobility).
• Design of schoolyards that is geared towards the playful and sporting needs of children and young people, which can vary depending on local possibilities (if necessary.
Through the use of radio technology), playgrounds can also be used outside of school hours (see Chapter For a safe and clean Dortmund).
• Schoolyards and playgrounds should be equipped with elements for traffic education (see Chapter Children, young people and seniors should be promoted and involved).
Out-of-school education and adult education should be promoted.
Learning does not end with graduation and at the school gate.
Out-of-school educational offers support school learning and learning in leisure time.
Offers for adults are also important to support lifelong learning.
Our demands and goals in this area are: • Existing evening schools should be maintained.
• A comprehensive program of the Volkshochschule should be maintained, which is both at the central location and in parts in the city districts.
• Invest in libraries in the city center and in the city districts, in which in addition to books and offers for promoting reading, there are also multimedia offers (for example Digital and children's books can be borrowed.
• Talent promotion for all age groups should be expanded and coordinated city-wide.
• Expanding political education, among other things, through cooperation between schools and municipal bodies such as district committees and councils.
• Continuing and updating the "LernDort" program as a model for extracurricular learning locations.
Encouraging and involving children, young people and seniors Despite all social inequality, it is in the interest of the whole society that all children and young people have the greatest possible opportunities for participation.
Children and young people have different needs than adults, and yet it is primarily adults who must work to realize them.
Seniors also have interests that must be taken into account in the overall society.
Securing offers for all age groups People of all age groups ask for offers that are tailored to their needs.
These offers should be designed to meet the needs of as many people as possible and should be interwoven with each other.
These are the tasks for the coming years.
Our specific demands and goals in this area are: • All childcare offers should be expanded in a timely and demand-driven manner.
This also applies to company kindergartens and forest kindergartens (see chapter Economic development and jobs for Dortmund).
• Develop more Kitas and primary schools into family centres.
• Establish model Kitas with, for example, childcare times adapted to shift work and evaluate demand.
• Build bridges between educational institutions so that, for example, through early language promotion in the Kita good foundations are laid for school learning or so that experiences in Kitas can be directly linked to primary schools.
• Promote early mobility training through increased use of the road school in Fredenbaum park and integration of elements for traffic training on school grounds and large playgrounds (see chapter Good education for people in Dortmund and chapter Sustainable, future-proof and safe mobility).
• Promote healthy nutrition in Kitas and schools, both in the local canteens and through counselling services for parents.
• Introduce a joint online portal to provide information on holiday offers from the city, voluntary organisations and private providers.
• Make the youth leader card (JuLeiCa) available in Dortmund, so that young people have an additional incentive to take on responsibility and engage in voluntary work.
• Expand the "practice-integrated training" (PiA) and increase the attractiveness of the profession of "educator" by providing training grants.
• Provide adequate personnel and financial resources for youth welfare services, so that they can recognise early indications of child endangerment, follow up on them and offer help or take protective measures.
• Support programmes that provide information on the dangers of political and religious extremism.
• Expand cross-generational offers, for example by establishing contact between families and preparing seniors for engagement through family centres.
• Expand the range of services offered by senior day care centres and senior housing facilities, and if necessary, build a dementia village (see chapter "Adequate housing for all citizens").
• Ensure medical care by actively recruiting specialist and general practitioners for under-served areas in the city.
Free medical practices in the public space must be made possible for all people.
Everyone has the fundamental right to participate in public affairs, political participation and the opportunity to pursue their own interests in suitable places of residence.
The necessary structures must be made available by the city.
Our specific demands and goals in this regard are: • A barrier-free, inclusive multi-generational playground in every district of the city.
• Places of stay such as playgrounds, ball courts, skate parks, benches and parks throughout the city, including in the changing inner city, must be renovated, maintained and expanded as needed.
• Political education activities must be supported and children and young people must be involved more strongly in the design of their living environment through offers for participation.
This is linked to an expansion of participation opportunities, which should range from individual actions to youth forums to the introduction of a youth parliament.
• The outreach youth welfare service must be intensified through the expansion of positions for street work.
Families and seniors must be structurally supported.
Special Challenging for families are also everyday costs, which we want to relieve families through a “family card”.
Specifically, we want: • Family support in housing construction: Young families and families with several children must have suitable housing in all cities (see chapter Adequate housing for all citizens) • For single people, especially older people, there must be sufficient barrier-free smaller apartments available (see chapter Adequate housing for all citizens) • A “family card” must be introduced, with which families receive discounted admission to urban facilities such as the zoo or swimming pools.
Dortmund as the capital of culture and leisure in the Ruhr area A broad range of cultural and leisure offers is available for all people in the city and, ideally, a magnet for people from the entire region.
This is how Dortmund fulfills its function as a central location in the region.
Equally, the financing of cultural and leisure offers is not a municipal task, but voluntary action.
In order for many things to be possible in this field, it is necessary to responsibly manage the overall situation of the city (see chapter Adequate housing for all citizens).
Chapter Sound financial management secures the ability to act) There are strongly publicly funded shares (for example Drama, opera, concert halls) and a free cultural scene, which is partly supported by municipal subsidies.
In general, leisure activities can be designed and structured, but even nature is a popular leisure space (see chapter Children, young people and the elderly support and involve & chapter Pragmatic and effective environmental policy for Dortmund) Our demands and goals in this area are: • Strengthen networking and cooperation: o regional partnerships to preserve cultural centers; o cultural networking with the partner cities (for example Guest performance - Pro o integrate cultural projects for students and schools into city life.
• Free scene and institutional cultural offerings need support that is based on proven performance.
• Agree on goals for all areas of the theater (for example Visitor numbers, income, advertising and awards) and for the "Dortmunder U" (for example one exhibition per year, which attracts a great many visitors).
• The facilities should be designed in such a way that they are attractive to large parts of the Dortmund community and encourage visits.
• To promote musical talent in the broadest sense and for top performances by supporting the Choral Academy and the Academy for Singing, as well as securing the (also decentralised) offerings at the Dortmund Music School.
• To make culture visible in everyday life through signs at historic monuments and exhibitions with QR codes, which can be used to access further information.
Where possible, also to enhance the offerings through modern lighting and lighting concepts.
• To support local associations in preserving cultural memories.
• To realise a "House of Dortmund History" as part of the Dortmund Museum Mile on the Wall.
• To designate areas for urban art.
• To modernise the internet pages of museums, archives and collections and to introduce a cultural app, in which information is bundled and made available.
• To maintain family-friendly admission prices for publicly funded facilities and events.
• To build the Young Stage on the Wall with the potential to also house the theatre • Construction of a depot to enable the stocks of the archive, libraries and museums to be stored, researched and restored in a protected manner.
• Focus on a few cultural prizes in the city to increase their relevance (for example Nelly Sachs Prize).
• Preserve and continue festivals and cultural events, for example in the gastronomic, classical musical or youth cultural fields, both in the city centre and in the boroughs.
• Implement the future concepts of the zoo, Romberg and Westfalen parks, as well as permanently preserve the IGA landscaping and further develop the Hoesch park as a sports and leisure area.
Broad and top-level sport in Dortmund.
The BvB is the flagship for the sporting city of Dortmund.
In addition to football, there are numerous further successes in top-level sport (for example Women's handball, athletics and rowing).
Significantly more people are involved in broad-based sport.
Sport is a hobby on the one hand, on the other hand it has various social functions, for example in individual health promotion and social integration.
The task of the city is to create framework conditions in partnership with clubs and to provide spaces for the practice of sport.
There is a need for action in these areas: Implementing conceptual measures and projects.
From basic structures, diverse offers arise.
Interest in sport must be awakened and special talents discovered.
Our demands and goals in this regard are: • To establish and implement the “Masterplan Sport”.
Regardless of this and in the meantime, the decided projects “Sportbewegter Raum Scharnhorst-Ost” and “Ballsport-Halle am U” must be accelerated.
• Adjust opening hours of sports and leisure pools according to demand.
• Simplify the organization of sporting events through the use of digital possibilities (for example online booking system for sports facilities and digital locking systems).
• More childcare centres than movement kindergartens are being established.
Implement building measures.
Sport needs places where it can be practised.
Places that are sought out and designed for the special needs of the different types of sport.
Our specific demands and goals in this regard are: • Develop a city-wide swimming pool concept so that swimming pools can be renovated or built in a way that meets the needs.
We need a solution for the Deusen outdoor pool and the new North pool as soon as possible.
• Maintain and renovate existing sports facilities for a wide range of sports in cooperation with clubs.
• Establish and maintain offers for physical exercise in public spaces (for example “Trimm-Dich-Pfade”, slacklines, calisthenics equipment) for different age groups and develop a sponsorship model for these facilities similar to playground sponsorship (see chapter “Promoting and involving children, young people and the elderly”).
• Expand barrier-free sports facilities and inclusive sports offers.
Secure financial support.
The ability to swim is a matter of survival.
The goal of “all children learn to swim” cannot be achieved through school swimming lessons alone.
Even top-level sports and major events require a large financial contribution from the state in order to be successful.
Our demands and goals in this area are: • Promote the swimming ability of all children through targeted support of school swimming by swimming assistants.
• Support top-level sports in all disciplines, including disabled sports, by strengthening the Dortmund sports association as a support institution.
• Host major sporting events – in agreement with the citizens.
Understand digitalization as an opportunity and drive it forward.
Digitalization is permeating all areas of society.
It is continuing to advance in business, private and professional life, but also in administration.
However, this historic change must not only be accompanied and shaped on a global or national level, but also on a municipal level.
In this context, digital sovereignty should be taken into account, so that no single dependencies on specific internal manufacturers arise.
The CDU Dortmund sees digitization as an opportunity to make the work of the city more efficient and better.
For us, however, it is not an end in itself, but we want to use the associated progress for the benefit of people.
To achieve this, we have the following goals: Continue to digitalize administrative work.
Digitization offers opportunities to significantly streamline work processes in many areas of the administration and to increase the efficiency of workplaces.
We want to seize this opportunity as follows:  Not only digitize analog work processes, but also restructure them if necessary, in order to fully exploit the potential of the technology.
• Expand the degree of digitization of the Dortmund city administration to one of the best in Germany by 2030.
• Introduce electronic files in all administrative areas comprehensively.
• Digitize old file archives, provided that they are of importance for current and future administrative work.
• Link various software programs of the administration more closely in order to transfer already known data - while complying with data protection • Applications of artificial intelligence will naturally become an integral part of daily administrative work.
Digital communication between citizens and the administration will improve.
In many areas of the economy, digital communication between customers and companies is a matter of course.
We want to achieve this level of communication between citizens and the administration as well – it offers advantages and convenience.
Therefore we want to: • Make almost all municipal services digitally available by 2030, so that as many administrative procedures as possible can be carried out online.
• Encourage people to use digital services.
• Automate the approval and processing of applications as far as possible.
• Use so-called “chatbots” and artificial intelligence to answer questions from citizens.
This should be implemented quickly, especially in the area of citizen services, and build on positive experiences from other cities.
• Despite digital offers, there should be no loss of advice and service through personal and telephone contact with municipal employees.
• Continue to expand the “virtual citizen office”, where administrative procedures can be carried out via video conference.
• Introduce a “digital queue”, i.e.
A notification on the mobile phone when the waiting time is almost over, to avoid long waiting times on site.
• Transparency about the number of people waiting in the queue before your call.
Expanding digital infrastructure for citizens and companies Many citizens and companies rely on a smoothly functioning digital communication and information system.
However, this is only possible with the right infrastructure.
Therefore, we want to: • Continue to develop the city as a “smart city” – together with the administration, companies and citizens.
• A comprehensive broadband expansion in the city is the key to a digital Dortmund.
Therefore, it will be intensified and accelerated.
• Support the expansion of 5G networks throughout the city.
• Establish free WLAN in all municipal buildings, facilities of municipal subsidiaries and in public transport and public spaces.
Promoting digital companies Digital companies belong to the largest growth sector of the future.
To continue to promote this growth in Dortmund and to support new company foundations is an integral part of a sustainable economic policy (see chapter on economic development and jobs for Dortmund).
Therefore, we want to: • Provide cost-effective spaces and rooms for the founding of digital start-ups.
• Make possible a further expansion of the technology centre.
• Support and understand the participation of the Dortmund Sparkasse in regional venture capital funds.
Involving people – strengthening digital education Digital competences are a basic prerequisite for digital participation.
Therefore, everyone who wants to acquire these competences should be given the opportunity to do so.
To this end, we want to: • Expand the digital educational offers of the Volkshochschule for all age and user groups.
• Support educational offers from private providers, such as established welfare providers.
For a citizen-friendly and efficient administration The city administration is essential for the smooth functioning of the city of Dortmund.
It provides a wide range of services for citizens and shapes the city together with the police.
At the same time, it is a responsible employer.
The C DU Dortmund will work to ensure that the city administration is efficient, economical and remains a responsible employer.
This is necessary to maintain its ability to communicate in the future.
To achieve this, we want to: Improve citizen friendliness Administration is not an end in itself.
It is there to improve the lives of people.
In our understanding, this can only be achieved by an administration that is close to the citizens.
To achieve this, we want to: • Restructure the telephone accessibility of the city administration in order to help citizens more quickly with their concerns.
• Consistently improve modern communication channels (“virtual citizen office”) and maintain traditional communication channels.
• Use translation software for better communication with people who speak foreign languages, which will benefit both employees and customers.
• Use “chatbots” and artificial intelligence.
• Develop information systems for better citizen participation.
• Accessibility by all modes of transport, especially public transport, should be a key criterion for selecting new administrative locations.
Reduce bureaucratic hurdles for municipal businesses.
Bureaucracy and regulations are one of the biggest obstacles to economic growth in Germany.
Even if many regulations and bureaucratic requirements are set by the federal government or the state, the municipal administration can make its contribution to relief by applying a programmatic and citizen-friendly approach (see chapter Economic Development and Jobs for Dortmund).
To this end, we want to: • With the introduction of a municipal bureaucracy reduction program, we want to review and reduce municipal regulations with regard to their benefits and burdens for businesses.
• Use legal scope for the citizen- and business-friendly application of federal and state laws and establish a “culture of enabling”.
Managers must initiate this process and take responsibility for the correspondingly changed working methods.
• Establish a central contact point for start-ups to facilitate official procedures.
• Increase the attractiveness of the city as an The employees of the city administration are their most important capital.
They deserve to work under good working conditions and with modern equipment.
At the same time, this can also increase the efficiency.
In this area, we want: • A diverse range of training courses and transparent personnel development concepts for the city employees.
• To continue to promote equality and nevertheless use suitability, performance and qualification as the only criteria for staffing.
• To exclude operational dismissals of city employees for the electoral period 2025-2030.
• To give employees more room for managing their core tasks through readiness to prioritize and a leadership culture based on trust.
• To reduce internal city administrative guidelines to relieve employees.
Real estate management should be designed to be cost-efficient.
Therefore, the use of administrative buildings must be consistently oriented towards business standards.
To this end, we want: • To carry out city work primarily in city-owned buildings and to reduce the number of objects rented by the city.
• In times when "home office" has become a fixed part of working life, intelligent use of workplaces by several employees through the expansion of so-called co-working spaces and desk sharing.
Efficient public services for citizens One of the central tasks of a municipality is to provide public services.
The secure supply of water and energy, the disposal of waste, the provision of a functioning communication infrastructure and a reliable public transport system are features of an attractive city.
In Dortmund, this is primarily the responsibility of the city's companies (including DSW21, DEW 21, EDG, DOGEWO 21 and Klinikum Dortmund).
In order to continue to handle these tasks in an efficient and economically responsible manner, the administration must set the financial, organisational and personnel framework conditions.
To achieve this, we have the following goals:  Companies from the city's group should not be privatised.
 We rule out business-related dismissals at city companies for the election period 2025-2030.
 Ensure an active role for the administration ("primacy of the administration") Establish intensive cooperation between the city administration and local businesses in order to leverage synergies.
Secure affordable energy supply Energy supply is of vital importance for citizens and businesses.
It must be secure and not a luxury and must increasingly be based on renewable energy sources (see chapter Pragmatic and effective environmental policy for Dortmund).
In order to support this, we want to: 

 Increase self-sufficiency by maintaining the municipal support program for private photovoltaic systems.
 Reduce the city's energy consumption through energy-efficient renovation and also increase energy generation on municipal buildings and areas.
 Expand the district heating network where it is economically viable.
Keep the city clean – make waste disposal more efficient A regulated and reliable waste disposal is just as essential for a clean and attractive cityscape as regular cleaning.
This is to be achieved through a more efficient waste disposal on the one hand and the consistent removal of waste and dirt on the other (see chapter For a safe and clean Dortmund).
Therefore we want:  Citizen-friendly opening hours for all recycling centers.
 Regular basic street cleaning in the city center as well as in other areas where many people gather (for example City centers; event mile Ströerallee), carried out.
 Swift removal of illegal garbage dumps.
 Increased educational work on proper garbage disposal.
 Tenants and owners are to be held more accountable for proper garbage disposal and violations are to be reduced.
A sound budget ensures the ability to act All of the above goals can only be achieved if enough money is available.
Only a sound budget can therefore preserve the ability to act of the city of Dortmund.
The CDU Dortmund stands for a serious budget policy that balances the budget in the long term and reduces debt as much as possible.
Because new debt is the burden for tomorrow and future generations.
Therefore, income and expenditure must be kept in balance.
However, new debts are socially unfair and higher taxes and fees are not acceptable for citizens.
Therefore, above all, expenditure must be limited.
This requires a consistent review of the municipal tasks and their implementation.
For sound financial management, we have the following goals: Limit tax and fee burdens.
The tax and fee burden is at an all-time high.
Further burdens are not acceptable for citizens in our eyes.
Rather, politicians and administration must handle existing money sparingly.
Therefore, we want to: Avoid further burdens on citizens and companies and therefore not increase either the property or business tax.
Maintain a socially fair design of the property tax through the low tax rate for residential properties.
Conduct a critical review of the use of fees before increasing them.
Use funding from the federal government, state and EU and demand cost reimbursement.
Municipalities fulfil many different tasks for the federal government, state and EU and are financially compensated for this.
These funds make a significant contribution to the municipal budget and must therefore be adequate.
Therefore we want: • Strict adherence to the so-called principle of connection when transferring tasks to the municipalities: whoever orders also pays.
• The federal government and the state should take over the costs for the care of refugees and their integration in a timely and complete manner.
• Push for a sustainable solution to the old debt problem, which must go beyond the agreements in the coalition agreement 2025 between CDU/CSU and SPD.
• Spend the rents owed to the city from the 500 billion euro special fund in addition to municipal investments and not instead of municipal investments.
• Use the provided subsidies consistently and quickly.
For this purpose, a priority for subsidizable projects will be introduced in the field of urban planning.
Voluntary expenses will be critically reviewed.
Many expenses of the city are based on legal and contractual obligations.
Cuts are therefore possible above all in the area of voluntary expenses.
To this end, we want to: • Conduct an inventory of voluntary municipal subsidies and review them for their usefulness and profitability.
• To avoid multiple offers, municipal offer structures should be reviewed, especially in the case of sports facilities or leisure activities.
• Restraint in the promotion of political activism.
Limit personnel expenditures and use municipal real estate in a profitable manner.
State action must be profitable – after all, it is the money of the citizens.
We want to limit personnel expenditures through better administrative structures and bureaucratic reduction.
Municipal real estate should be used efficiently.
To reduce expenditures, we therefore want to: • Review municipal tasks for necessity and whether the employed personnel is absolutely necessary there.
• Even if there is a renunciation of operational dismissals in 2025 – 2030, there should be no automatic increase in staff for new tasks; it must be checked whether existing personnel can be used.
• Unnecessary municipal properties should be sold or leased.
• Municipal properties should be used more profitably through energy-efficient renovation (s.
Chapter Pragmatic and effective environmental policy for Dortmund) Our 12 districts are a very important part of Dortmund and its decentralised structures of the 12 districts.
The district councils are the place of political will formation.
In each of the 12 districts the CDU is represented with an engaged and competent team with good ideas.
For an overview in detail, please see the heads and contents for the districts.
Call to vote Now it is up to you, dear voters!
You have got to know us with our heads, our ideas and our clear political compass for a good future of our home town in the next 5 years.
You have learned that we make politics for the people of the community and the majority society.
For us, common sense and practical wisdom are the standard for our political actions.
In love with Dortmund – under this heading the Dortmund CDU will work for a good future of our home town in the next 5 years.
We are in exactly the same position as you: Dortmund is not perfect.
Dortmund is a city of permanent change, a city in which the future can be won.
We are convinced of this and that is why we love this city, which is our home.
You probably feel the same way.
You can see that we are in love with Dortmund, just like you probably are.
Give this attitude your vote in the local elections.
With your vote for the CDU:  Make Dortmund an even more livable city.
 Support measures for more security and order in Dortmund.
 Secure and create jobs.
 Promote modern infrastructure.
Give the democratic majority a strong voice.
Therefore, vote with your vote in the municipal elections on 14 September 2025: 
- Alexander Kalou as CDU candidate for the election of the mayor
- The candidates and candidates of the CDU for the city council
- The lists of the CDU for the elections to the district councils
- The list of the CDU for the "Ruhr Parliament" at the Regional Association of Ruhr (RVR)