1 2 3Election program 4of the Dortmund Free Democrats on the 5Local elections on September 13, 2020 6 7Out of the crisis, into the future: 8Getting ahead through your own performance 9We want people to be able to stand on their own two feet and make a difference in life through their own  achievements. 10move forward. We want Dortmund to become stronger together through its own performance - 11economically and socially. To achieve this, we need a strong economy and sustainable workplaces. 12jobs. We are committed to removing barriers for small and medium-sized enterprises and creating a positive 13climate for creativity, independence and innovation. Municipalities also need 14We show solidarity with the weak in our society. However, social is not who all possible 15promises the highest possible social benefits. Social is who empowers people to choose their own 16to exploit and expand their potential. 17The coronavirus crisis has also created a completely new economic situation in Dortmund. 18from a long-lasting economic boom to the crisis within a few weeks. 19worst recession since the Second World War. The crisis will have considerable long-term consequences. 20Entire industries are facing massive economic damage and job losses in 2020. 21from trade fairs and congresses to hotels, restaurants, catering and the hospitality industry. 22from showmen at folk festivals to seminar providers and cultural enterprises. Other branches 23are affected by their customers' loss of income due to short-time work and economic downturns. 24economic uncertainty - not least the retail sector and the skilled trades. The economic 25The current crisis is also a social crisis, affecting the self-employed, low-income earners and so- 26particularly affects the socially disadvantaged. 27To bridge the worst of the economic damage, the state government has made 28CDU and FDP provide exemplary emergency aid for solo self-employed and small businesses 29provided. NRW aid has gone far beyond the funds provided by the federal government and has contributed to 30In addition, companies with between 11 and 50 employees are helped. 31Beyond emergency aid, policymakers must work swiftly on a new upswing so that 32the crisis is overcome quickly. The federal and state governments in particular have the tools to do this. But 33The city of Dortmund can and must also make its contribution. 34 Subscribe to DeepL Pro to translate larger documents. Visit www.DeepL.com/pro for more information.