The Dortmund Programme 2020 – 2025 of the CDU describes our ideas for the future of our city.
Our convictions are based on around 1,200 years of city history, in which it has always been possible to win the future anew.
We are firmly convinced that we will successfully master the challenges of the Corona pandemic and emerge stronger from this crisis.
Dortmund is a multicoloured, up-and-coming, courageous and open-minded city with committed and down-to-earth citizens who look to the future with confidence.
The future of our city can only be designed and shaped here.
The integration of intelligence, expertise and creativity of the committed Dortmund citizens is the best basis for a sustainable and broadly supported city.
We want to lead by example in Dortmund when it comes to the resources for a good climate, clean air and environmentally friendly transportation – in short: life in the city of the future.
The appropriate suit for this consists of common sense, viable concepts and the necessary pace.
Dortmunders meet each other at various city and district festivals, in cultural venues, in parks, at Cityring concerts, at markets, in our sports facilities and at major city events, to celebrate and bring this ‘together’ to life.
Dortmund has already recognised the opportunities of the mega-topic of digitalisation in the past and has been awarded as the ‘most digital city’
Dortmund needs a balancing budget policy that, on the one hand, enables the maintenance of social services, but also sets impulses for the Maintenance of dynamic urban development.
Modern technologies have turned the administration and municipal companies into "all-round service providers" for us Dortmunders.
Uncomplicated accessibility and high citizen friendliness are important, because they promise an image gain.
Housing, urban development and the environment – for a modern and sustainable life in our city.
Dortmund is the growing Westphalian central location and in future is to convey the character of a metropolis even more clearly.
Housing, living and working must be brought together more strongly in Dortmund.
We want our city to create sufficient living space in all market segments so that the various housing needs are taken into account.
The criterion of social compatibility is just as decisive for the CDU as the economic orientation of Dortmund.
Our aim is for Dortmund to remain attractive as a central location for trade and culture in the future.
We want to connect living and working more closely on site, in order to achieve traffic relief where possible.
We reject the idea of massively restricting the mobility of individual groups for ideological reasons.
The clubs and communities of amateur sports play a central role here.
We will continue to support our clubs and the many volunteers to the best of our ability.
In addition, we want to secure the future of our parks and leisure facilities.
The university city of Dortmund is growing.
As a cultural center of an entire region, the city has a special role and responsibility.
This includes, above all, the profile as the “City of Music” that is perceived locally, regionally and beyond.
The CDU is particularly committed to the quality and ambition-oriented, engaged promotion of the variety of free culture.
Security, order and cleanliness are the heart of the CDU Dortmund's policy.
Culture provides relaxation, inspiration, creativity, variety, tradition, and visitor and tourism magnets.
Social policy is a broad field and social policy references almost all topics in the present municipal election program.
A zero tolerance strategy against criminal clans, political extremism and so-called tumultuous offenses helps, in our opinion, to achieve these goals.
The creation of jobs, good education and training, better qualifications, placement and the reintegration of long-term unemployed into the job market are just as important as the equality of women.
Social policy framework conditions are often set by the federal government and the state.
Families and family support are essential focal points of our policy.
The enormous willingness of the people of Dortmund to help at the height of the refugee crisis in 2015 moved us deeply.
Many people who fled war and persecution and came to Dortmund at that time still live in our city today.
The reception of refugees in Europe must be resolved in a coordinated and solidary manner.
Only a targeted and accepted distribution of refugees by all European states guarantees that the enormous challenges can be overcome.
CDU Dortmund's political goals are: The future of our society is decisively shaped by the family.
We want to make the reconciliation of family and career easier through better childcare.
We reject ideologically motivated preferential treatment of individual school types.
The well-being of children with and without disabilities is of paramount importance.
The education of our children is the key to social advancement, protection against unemployment and the greatest possible participation in our society.
For us, the social background of children must not determine their educational success.
Our political goals are: Continuation of school development planning.
Support for the implementation of the school construction program for innovative, modern schools.
No expansion or construction of new comprehensive schools at the expense of primary or secondary schools.
A common registration date for all schools – early registration for comprehensive schools impairs free school choice.
No construction of a market hall on Hansaplatz Healthcare/Clinic/Nursing 4.0.
Strengthening of the Dortmund Clinic as a maximum care facility in municipal ownership.
The largest nursing school in North Rhine-Westphalia on the Canisius Campus in Hoeschpark.
Intensified promotion of company locations that produce age-appropriate assistance systems (AAL) or offer corresponding services.
The CDU has stood for innovation in education, the economy, science and research for decades as the party of practical reason.
Our social compass is oriented towards social justice, which has the goal of promoting and demanding.
We are well equipped in terms of both personnel and resources for the dynamics of change, which we will continue to face in Dortmund.
Our Dortmund Programme 2020 – 2025 aims to be far-sighted, innovative, moderate and balanced.
The candidates of the CDU in the first direct election to the “Ruhr Parliament” at