SAFETY PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS9 6.D O R T M U N D : S I C H E R ,S A U B E R ,N A Z I F R E I Eliminate areas  of fear "I'd rather  not go that way now ..." Many people  know this thought.  We must not accept  this. The only way to eliminate  areas of fear is  with a good mix. Every place that causes  fear needs  its own solution.  Sometimes  it's about lighting,  sometimes  it's about more presence   from the city and police,  sometimes  it's just about broken  windows  on a neglected  building.  We will be setting  up a completely  new area of  responsibility  in the administration  in order to bundle  responsibilities.  The following  will apply to our work: Transparency  is the top . The first step  will be to draw up a map  the areas of fear.  will be regular  updates  on the current  status  of the location.  It will then be possible  to track  what has happened  and whether  it has helped.  We will work to ensure  that there  a permanent  police  presence  on bicycles  in Dortmund's   Nordstadt  district  in order to combat  areas of fear more effectively. Clean  city A carelessly  discarded  cigarette  butt - the napkin  from the currywurst  falls on the floor and nobody  picks it up. The plastic  film from the  chocolate  wrapper  is so sticky and light that it ends up next to the garbage  can. The cleanliness  of a city is quickly  lost if we don't all pay attention  to it.  A well-equipped  EDG helps,  a "dirt snitch  app" on the smartphone  helps,  but we have to get to the heart of the problem:  ourselves.  We will  launch  a campaign  with the aim of having  at least 5 percent  less dirt on the roads every year. By 2030, we want to have eliminated  at least half of  it. Close  to nature  instead  of uncontrolled growth When  you walk through  our streets,  the city's greenery  along the road sometimes  looks as if nobody  really cares.  It often looks like haphazard   uncontrolled  growth.  That's  why we the city administration  in 2019. But of course  that's not enough.  We must also be prepared  spend  more  money  on care. This is not only an opportunity  program  for new and good work, but also eliminates  places  that littering,  obstruct  footpaths  and (cycle)   paths or  considered  to be inaccessible  and unsafe. nonazisdo Anyone  who lives from threatening  others,  who even makes  a business  model  out of it, has no here. That applies  to all extremists.  However,   we the neo-Nazis  in Dortmund  as a problem  for the city as a whole  and as a threat to our open and tolerant  society.  The external  impact  is  devastating  for Dortmund.  We will not tolerate  this! To this end, we will strengthen  the people  and groups  who are working  on the ground   every day and have already  achieved  a great deal. In addition,  we want to develop  a new offer for Dortmund  schools  to strengthen  political   education.  We want to continue  to use and strengthen  the good experiences  already  made by institutions  such as the municipal  coordination   office for diversity,  tolerance  and democracy  as well as, for example,  the neighborhood  democrats  and BackUp-ComeBack .