Page 1:
Dortmund has had a clear compass  in Dortmund  for 74 years: solidarity and progress. After our city was destroyed  as a result of National  Socialist barbarism,  we rebuilt  it together. Dortmund was often pronounced  dead and we always  got up again. The new decade  needs  new answers. We want to apply for another  5 years with this program. We  wanted  it and received  the trust for it. It's time for a new generation of leaders in Dortmund.


Page 2:
Dortmund must be the big city in Germany that everyone can afford - that is our aspiration. Our central task is to secure  a supply  of affordable housing in the medium and long term. We need to build 2,000 new and affordable  apartments  every year to the needs  of a growing city. We want to eliminate tax advantages for the  sale of apartments by private housing companies. We also want to build up, advise and support networks of individual  owners. Good  living needs  good  building Houses  in Dortmund  should be energy  efficient.


Page 3:
A municipal service company is to be founded for this  purpose. We want to prevent  speculation  with land. The sale of municipal land to private  housing investors should be largely avoided. Speculation  is not possible with us. Our aim is to achieve  a good mix in the city that brings  people   together. Through  "master planning  for housing"  for the entire city, we want to create  neighborhoods for families,   young  singles  and couples.


Page 4:
Dortmund's new climate plan aims to reduce CO2 emissions by 55 percent by 2030. The city also wants to improve the quality of its parks, gardens and allotments. Dortmund is the only city in Germany to close a coal-fired power plant without subsidies. It is also the only one to complete the energy transition to clean energy by 2030, says the city's energy chief. The plan will also focus on how to make the city climate-proof for tomorrow, today, says Mayor Jens Spahn.


Page 5:
Dortmund is the No. 1 center for logistics research in Europe. It is therefore time for Dortmund to be a role model for new urban logistics. The improvement of public transport and the cycle path network must be shaped from the bottom up. Dortmund has done its homework and will be getting new and better electric buses and trains from 2021 - but that's not enough. We also want Dortmund to take on a pioneering role in the field of digital public transport. The goal is clear: a 365- euro ticket for the entire Ruhr region.


Page 6:
Long-term unemployment is falling, but it remains the most urgent task in our city. Digital infrastructure is of central importance for Dortmund as a digital hub. Local trade is always the driving force behind public spaces. Dortmund must  be a high-speed city! Local retail needs  public  space and vice versa. We want to strengthen the local economy - because it is the backbone of our city (districts)7 5. ECONOMY PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL ELECTIONS.


Page 7:
8 Promoting craftsmanship Dortmund's skilled  trades are tradition and, above all, the future. No sector achieves more in terms of inclusion,  integration  and innovation in everyday life. We want to further  develop  the awarding  of municipal contracts - through  new objectives and significantly   simpler processes. If this quicker,  it will also be quicker  to implement. We hope to see   more  local jobs in Dortmund by the end of the year. We also hope  to see more jobs in the city in the coming years.


Page 8:
Neo-Nazis in Dortmund are a problem for the city as a whole, says mayor. "We must not accept  this. The only way to eliminate  areas of fear is  with a good mix," he says. Dortmund will launch a campaign with the aim of having 5 percent less dirt on the roads every year. By 2030, we want to have eliminated  at least half of the city's littering, says Mayor Jurgen Klopp. "The cleanliness  of a city is quickly lost if we don't all pay attention," he adds.


Page 9:
Dortmund is the social capital of Germany. Poverty  affects women in particular. Violence  has no place in Dortmund. All people in Dortmund should be guaranteed the same opportunity to pursue an educational career that matches their individual abilities and achievements. The Ruhr region,  and our city in particular,  has always been a colorful mix of long-established,  new and  short-term residents of Dortmund, which is why a welcoming culture is already a reality  here today. 10 7. SOLIDARITY PROGRAM FOR THE 2020 LOCAL ELECTIONS10 7.


Page 10:
Loneliness is an often suppressed topic that we need to address much more. Among  the older generation  in particular,  this has been accepted   in silence for far too long. We will set up the first staff unit in Germany to combat loneliness. Nobody  should,  nobody  has to be lonely  in Dortmund - that is our goal, because  there are real fates behind  this. SOLIDARITY PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS11 Combat loneliness


Page 11:
Borussia's education minister has launched a program for the 2020 local elections. The program aims to improve the quality of education and childcare in the city. Borussia's schools will be equipped with high-performance WLANs and fast internet connections. All children and young people will have access to free and healthy meals and public transport. Dortmund will also establish a municipal social index with the means at its disposal to help tackle inequality in education and care for the city's children. It will be the first of its kind in Germany and the first in Europe.


Page 12:
13 would only be a first, but will also connect  generations. Dortmund  belongs  to families,  young  people  and children. We want to bundle  and expand  all the offers for children  in the city in a  large, free program for every summer vacation. New highlights  a city Olympics as the finale of the summer  games. A children's music festival and the first Dortmund Youth Film Festival. Our parents should  not have to worry about childcare  during  the  summer  vacation. And our children  should  be allowed  to play during the vacations.


Page 13:
The mayor of Dortmund has set out a health program for the 2020 local elections. Children's health is a top priority for the city council. The mayor also wants to improve the quality of care close to home for children. The city council will also focus on housing, education and mobility in the coming years. The election will be held on September 14, 2020. The winner will be announced on September 13, 2020 at 10:30 a.m. local time (9:30 p.m.)


Page 14:
Dortmund Mayor: We want a major Dortmund conference at which the major guidelines are developed by consensus. We don't want to exclude  ourselves  from listening. We are the party that cares for people  for a reason. We will continue  to initiate  citizen participation projects after the end of the nordwärts project. We also want to set up a "Caring for You" platform  for Dortmund  on the Internet. Our neighbourhood  campaign is running successfully and our goal is to launch it throughout the city.


Page 15:
Culture  from Dortmund should be for something new and exciting. We want to continue  on the path we have taken with the Academy  for Digitality and Theater. Children  and  young people in particular need open access  to culture. Nightlife  in Dortmund  needs  to  a real and new experience  again. Dortmund,  Pokémon  Go, Juicy Beats, Festi Ramazan and Comic-Con have shown that even more is possible and that Dortmund is always open to new ideas.


Page 16:
Dortmund is the city in Germany that still offers its citizens all public services. By 2030, we will have digitized  all municipal services. We will continue  our voice in Düsseldorf and Berlin on many issues. We want to keep the tax burden  in the city stable. The reform  must not lead to a sudden  shortfall  of millions through tax tricks or to people being unfairly burdened more. The SPD is abolishing  the Local Rates  Act (KAG)


