LIVING PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS3 2.W O H N E NI S TT H ES O C I A L EF R A T  U R E O F O U R PURPOSE Affordable  housing Dortmund  must be the big city in Germany  that everyone  can afford - that is our aspiration.  Our central  task is to secure  a supply  of  affordable  housing  in the medium  and long term. It is clear to us that the demand  for affordable  housing  will remain  high as the stock of  social housing  continues  to . We know that we need to build 2,000 new and affordable  apartments  every year to  the needs  of a growing  city. We  need more apartments  for young  people,  apartments  suitable  for students,  spacious  apartments  for families  and more housing  projects  that bring  generations  together.  To achieve  this, we will increase  social housing  construction  in existing  and new buildings.  We will actively  and quickly    building  land for new apartments  via a "Dortmunder  Wohnen"  service  company.  To this end, we will launch  our own municipal  housing   construction  program  via DOGEWO.  These  and other concrete  measures,  such as aiming  for a quota of up to 30 percent  in publicly  subsidized   housing  construction  in Dortmund,  will be part of an urban "overall  housing  strategy",  in which we also want to involve  local cooperatives  in  particular. Eliminate yield  pressure We want to discuss  and plan major housing  developments  together  with the local population.  We want a "Planning  in advance,  freed from the pressure  of returns  and construction  pressure  of current  planning  processes.  This would  allow the  neighbors  of a new district  to  involved  with their ideas and questions  right from the start. In addition,  we want to eliminate  the tax advantages  for the  sale of apartments  by private  housing  companies.  We also want to build up, advise  and support  networks  of individual  owners.  In this way, we  are creating  a broad alliance  for good housing  in Dortmund.  We expect  clear guidelines  from the state and federal  governments:   should  be a statutory   upper limit for rent increases.  The cap on rent increases  must reduced  nationwide  from 20 percent  to 15 percent  in three years.  The notice   period  for the conversion  of rental apartments  into owner-occupied  apartments  should  remain  at five years.  The housing  industry  needs  a  legally  defined  "new non-profit  status"  that clearly  divides  profit interest  and non-profit  status. Further  development  of run-down  portfolios As a city as a whole,  we need to have a political  and strategic  discussion  about the further  development  of housing  stock that is no longer   marketable.  The conditions  - such as the so-called  "junk properties"  Hannibal  II and the high-rise  building  in Kielstraße  - must  counteracted  in  good time by the city's housing  inspectorate.  We want to review  and implement  the options  for action  formulated  in the neighborhood  analyses   for each individual  neighborhood  in Dortmund.  Another  building  block is new forms of participation  for residents,  for example  through   neighborhood  funds,  and an expansion  of the city's housing  supervision. Good  living  needs  good  building Houses  in Dortmund  should  be energy  efficient.  The City of Dortmund  should   a reliable  and competent  partner  for owners  when it comes  to advising   and promoting  energy-efficient  conversions.  In addition  to the requirements  of the building  regulations,  we are striving   further  improvements  to  accessibility  in existing  buildings  (e.g. the installation  of elevators)  and the promotion  of age-appropriate  conversions  of existing  buildings.