ECONOMY PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS7 5.G U T EWORK AND S T A R K E   W O R L D S Our priorities:  Reducing  long-term  and youth unemployment We have  a long way together  as an entire city. This is the only way we have been able to halve unemployment  in recent  years - in a growing   city. Long-term  unemployment  is falling,  but it remains  the most urgent  task in our city. The Dortmund  model  for the social labor market  is so  good that it has now become  a model  for the whole  of Germany.  Now we want to become  the role model  that has also solved  this problem  by  2030. This also applies  in particular  to youth unemployment.  We want break new ground  here. The successful  model  of training  coordination   at the Hauptschule  Husen  secondary  school  will now be  to everyone  with a secondary  school  leaving  certificate.  With a "learning  factory",  we  will create  a completely  new place for young  people's  prospects.  This is because  we need suitable  offers not just after leaving  school,  but already  at  school  in order to tackle  unemployment  and lack of prospects  at an early stage.  We are taking  into account  the important  role of vocational   colleges  in vocational  preparation  and the qualification  of young  people  for higher  school  qualifications  by expanding  and providing   workshops  and specialist  rooms.  The outstanding  refurbishment  or possible  new construction  of three vocational  colleges  will be tackled   swiftly. Stronghold  for start-ups  and SMEs We have come through  the structural  change  successfully  because  we have focused  on traditional  Westphalian  SMEs  and new start-ups  from  the world of science.  The two are not contradictory,  but are firmly in Dortmund.  The Dortmund  Technology  Center  is the model  of success  in Europe   for this approach.  With this nucleus,  we want to continue  to grow across  the entire city, especially  in the north of Dortmund.  With Smart  Rhino,   the energy  campus  at the Hansa  coking  plant, the learning  factory  in Westhausen  and Speicherstraße,  new centers  are currently  being created   here and more will be added  in the coming  years.  These  will not isolated  beacons,  but new nuclei for the districts  and networks.  Companies  will find a  home there and not just a home market,  because  in Dortmund,  business  and urban society  go hand in hand for the future. Digital  infrastructure  has priority A fiber optic network,  5G and widely  available,  open Wi-Fi are of central  importance  for Dortmund  as a digital  hub. This applies  to both people   and companies.  That is why we have initiated  a process  aimed   the genuine  expansion  of fiber optics. After all, our future is at stake.  We want to  go one better here. The next milestone  for us is open Wi-Fi throughout  the city center  up to the trade fair and stadium,  including  all buses   and trains.  Dortmund  must  a high-speed  city! Local  retail  needs  public  space  and vice versa The retail trade is changing.  The internet  is leading  to major changes  here. At the same time, however,  a vibrant  city needs  precisely  this  local trade, which is always  the driving  force behind  public  spaces.  However,  if this public  space  itself does not  people  to linger,  if vacancies   are rampant  and the weekly  market   no longer  properly  visited,  then we are losing  something.  That is why we have launched  initiatives  to tackle  public spaces,  weekly  markets  and vacancies.  We want to bring these ideas forward  in order to redesign  each district  individually  and strengthen   the local economy  - because  it is the backbone  of our city (district)  centers.