INVESTMENTS PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS17 12.I N V E S T I G A T I O N   I S NOW     A S A G E D Investing  is now the order of the day In this decade,  we have succeeded  in turning  the city budget  around.  We were the only city in the Ruhr region  that did not need any help from  Düsseldorf  to achieve  this; we were able to determine  our own destiny.  Now we are a new decade.  Our task now  to invest boldly and  up new  substance  again.  The priorities  are clear and we have described  them: Children,  mobility,  innovation  and infrastructure.  The Dortmund  SPD is  abolishing  the Local Rates  Act (KAG). Remain a full-range  supplier Dortmund  is the city in Germany  that still offers its citizens  all public  services.  We never went along with the privatization  wave of the others   and were insulted  for years.  Today  it is clear that we were right. But that's not enough  for us. Public  services  must always  be accessible  to  everyone  and be of the highest  standard.  That is solidarity  in action.  We will introduce  social tariffs where  they are necessary.  Those  who  make savings  here will reap injustice.  At the same time, we always  want to ensure  that the municipal  subsidiaries  remain  competitive  and can  continue  to develop.  Not as an end in itself, but because  they are service  providers  for the people  in this city. Strong  and service-oriented  city thanks  to more  staff Digitization  makes  a lot possible.  It also helps us to improve  the services  provided  by the city administration.  To this end, we will intensify  the  city's digitalization  efforts  in the coming  years in order to improve  the services  offered  to citizens.  By 2030, we will have digitized  all municipal   services  so that citizens'  services  in particular  can be dealt with quickly  and conveniently  from home. Our goal  to become  Germany's  most digital   city administration.  But at the end of the day, there is always  a person   their job for the people  of this city. So where  there is a shortage  of  people,  for example  in the citizens'  services,  the public  order office and in building  administration,  we also need to train and employ  more  people  there. There  is no way around  this, because  quality  does not come for free. Staying  the course  - tidy finances We will continue  to ensure  that Dortmund  has a good budget  in the future.  We will continue  to  our voice in Düsseldorf  and Berlin on many  issues , be it social spending  or regulations  for old debts.  Because  we want to keep the tax burden  in the city stable.  This applies  to trade tax as well as  property  tax. We will take a particularly  close look at property  tax. The reform  must not lead to a sudden  shortfall  of millions  through  tax tricks or  to people  being unfairly  burdened  more. We will continue  to campaign  for a land value tax in Berlin in order to put a stop to speculation  in  this area in particular.