ENVIRONMENT  AND  CLIMATE PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS5 3.U M W E L TANDK L I M A Climate  change  and the city Climate  change  is not only real, it already  tangible.  Better fresh air, more greenery  and water in the city have been the result of good policies  in recent   years.  We must continue  to keep this in mind and prepare  Dortmund  for the challenges  of climate change. "make  fit". Our green spaces  must  adapted  to climate  change  in the coming  years.  We need the right greenery  and we will need even more, for example   an additional  1,000 new trees every year and an increase  in our forest stock. But we don't just need a good climate  protection  plan, we also need  think about climate  adaptation.  With the next plan, we want to define  how we can make the city climate-proof  for tomorrow,  today.  To do this,  we need to set new and high standards  for public  buildings  and our infrastructure.  Whether  it snows,  rains or the next heatwave  comes,  we  have to our city for it. This investment  program  should  also strengthen  our local trades  in particular  through  municipal  contracts. Think  globally,  act locally The Climate-Air  2030 action  program  stipulates  that we reduce  CO2 emissions  in the city by 55 percent.  We want to see if we can do more. If  we want to achieve  more for the climate  in our city, then above  all we need more action on the ground.  This includes  not only information  and  education,  but also support  for individuals  or initiatives  that want to do something.  For example,  we want the agricultural  land owned  by the  city to be put to better use: As open organic  gardens  for citizens.  We want to support  these and other initiatives  with the Dortmund  Climate   Network. More  quality  for our natural treasures The sky above  us is blue again,  the Emscher  is slowly  becoming  a river again and many of the old industrial  floors have also  replaced.  In  2027, Dortmund  will  the site of the International  Garden  Exhibition.  Here, we as a city will show that we have managed  to successfully  bring  together  the economy  and the environment  for both sides. But we want this new quality  throughout  the city - be it the zoo, parks,  allotments  or  natural  landscape  - everywhere.  We will launch  a comprehensive  program  to raise and enhance  these green treasures  in our city. Meeting climate  targets Germany  will have to meet the Paris climate  protection  targets  by 2030. This means  going further  than before.  It is good that Dortmund  is the only city  that has successfully  closed  a coal-fired  power  plant without  subsidies.  We are currently  also providing  very specific  support  to our  neighbors  in achieving  this. With the Energy  Future  Master  Plan, we have set out to complete  the energy  transition  by 2030. We are also  particularly  strong  in the heating  sector.  The ongoing  expansion  of the heat supply  in Dortmund  is a nationwide  model.  The municipal  utility Dortmunder   Energie-  und Wasserversorgung  GmbH  (DEW21)  is investing  a total of more than EUR 100 million  in the conversion  of the heating  supply  in the coming   years.  By modernizing  the heating  network  in Dortmund's  city centre  and integrating  industrial  waste heat, the city will save around  45,000  tonnes  of  CO2 per year from 2023 - equivalent  to the emissions  of around  3,000 cars. One of the next steps will to set up a cooling  network  to avoid  the next  problem  with air conditioning  systems.  So the homework  has been done when it comes  to energy  and heat. We will continue  to push ahead  with the  expansion  of photovoltaic  systems  on Dortmund's  roofs. It is therefore  very clear to us that, when it comes  to climate  protection  in Dortmund,   mobility  will be the main challenge  of the next decade.