CULTUR E PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS16 11.C U L T U R ,N A C T I V I T Y A  N DL E V E L O P M E N T Excellent  at the top and strong  across the board For us, everyone  has the right to culture.  We see it as the city's task to create  spaces  and opportunities  where  culture  and people  can develop.   Culture  from Dortmund  should   for something  new and exciting.  We want to continue  on the path we have taken with the Academy  for Digitality  and  Theater  with all six disciplines  and create  more new places  for the future.  There  should  be more local cultural  offerings  and creative  artists   should  be given more opportunities  in the city. That is why we will  funding  for the independent  scene. Culture  is allowed  to Dortmund  culture  has many faces. Above  all, culture  can fun. For us, this also includes  BVB fan culture,  pop music,  e-sports  and many other areas.   We want these to find a permanent  and colorful  home on the new Strobelallee  fan mile. Culture  can also education.  Just as education  should  not be a privilege  for the few, we believe  that everyone  has the right to access  culture.   For us, it is therefore  the city's task to create  more offers for everyone.  That is why we want to expand  the offerings  for all age groups.  Children  and  young  people  in particular  need open access  to culture.  That is why we want to open up the children's  and youth theater  further  and strengthen  it with  a new building. Experience  and revitalize Dortmund Dortmund's  nightlife  used to be more colorful.  Nightlife  in Dortmund  needs  to  a real and new experience  again.  We want to strengthen  the trendy   districts  and the bar and club culture  with a "nightlife  mayor"  who mediates,  facilitates  and  the scene  a face. The range of restaurants  can also  be broader  and better positioned.  We want to specifically  promote  individual  gastronomy  concepts  in certain  areas in order to create  truly  recognizable  nightlife  districts.  Dortmund  should  be characterized  by diversity  and a wide range of offers. Relaxed  and fun The Christmas  market  is a tradition  in Dortmund.  Funfairs  and district  festivals,  often developed  and maintained  by volunteers,  are real places   of good neighborliness  and attractions  for the neighborhoods.  Customs  are firmly anchored  and cultivated  here. Dortmund,  Pokémon  Go,  Juicy Beats,  Festi Ramazan  and Comic-Con  have shown  that even more is possible  and that Dortmund  is always  open to new ideas.  Good  events  in a city can be the salt in the soup - but it's all quality  and quantity.  With a new event company,  we therefore  not only want to manage  new and old  events  better,  but also involve  local people  in shaping  them. We also want to find a location  for a new forest and outdoor  stage to  up new possibilities . Everyone  gives  what  they can We want to test new payment  models  for the city's leisure  and cultural  offerings.  Instead  of paying  at the entrance,  everyone  should  pay at the exit as  much as they are willing  or able to give. We want to start with a park and a major exhibition.