MOBILITY PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS6 4.M O B I L I T Y FOR A L L E ,OVER  A L L Putting users  at the center We don't want to dictate  to anyone  which means  of transportation  should  be used as a priority.  But we want to  everyone  the opportunity   really choose.  This applies  in particular  to cycling.  We will have to achieve  even more here: A closed  network  of high quality  and safety.  However,   Dortmund  is not only lacking  such a closed  cycle path network.  Our yardstick  developing  a new transport  system  for our city is not the professional   cyclist.  We have to think in terms of the weakest  users:  children  and families.  For them, we need above  all a safe cycle path system  with wide and  clearly  demarcated  lanes. For us, this also includes  new inner-city  cycle lanes, for example  parallel  to the B1 and along the Wall, as well as good  opportunities  to quickly  cross the already  car-free  city center  and the numerous  parks.  We will also  a sufficient  number  of secure,  covered   and lockable  bicycle  parking  spaces. Dortmund  can do it: Logistics  turns  from  a problem  to a solution on site Dortmund  is the No. 1 center  for logistics  research  in Europe.  It is therefore  time for us to a role model  for new urban logistics  in Europe.   People  and neighborhoods  must sustainably  relieved  despite  increasing  internet  trade. That's  why we need tough regulations  in  of noise and  pollution.  As a strong  logistics  location,  Dortmund  can a pioneer  for urban transportation . With the new traffic development  plan, we want to  continuously  reduce  the impact  of heavy  goods  traffic by 5 percent  every year. By 2030, the load should  be at least halved  - and the damage   to the roads will also be significantly  reduced.  We want to make traffic light circuits  more intelligent  across  the board in order to reduce   standing  and unnecessary  pollutant  emissions. Public  transport:  time  for something  new and real solutions Dortmund  has done its homework  and will be getting  new and better electric  buses and trains from 2021 - but that's not . We also want Dortmund  to  take on a pioneering  role in the field of digital public transport.  For example,  we need a better frequency  on many sections,  the extension  or expansion   of some rail lines, more night-time  services  and an expansion  of the H-Bahn  to move more people.  But many people  commute  and the traffic does not  end at the city limits, but often enough  in delays.  If you then ask yourself  why it doesn't  work in the Ruhr region,  you always  end up with  everyone  the finger at everyone  else. Bus connections  in particular  must no longer  end at the city limits. With a company  for new mobility,   we want to achieve  a significant  expansion  of the network  and the service,  which will also become  more affordable.  The goal is clear: a 365- euro ticket for the entire  Ruhr region. Developing from  the bottom  up The improvement  of public transport  and the cycle path network  must be shaped  from the bottom  up. However,  this requires  not only good ideas on the  ground,  but also prospects  for implementation.  To this end, we want to set up a traffic turnaround  office to coordinate  and take responsibility  for  implementation  within the administration.  We want to have the courage  to try out a wide variety  of concepts  and ideas for improving  living  spaces  and mobility . It should  be possible  to try out ideas for revitalizing  public spaces  as well as pedestrian  areas or traffic-calmed  zones for a limited   period  of time. The experience  gained  with these measures  should  then be  to decide  together  with residents  on the further  implementation,   continuation  or rejection  of the measures.