SOLIDARITY PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS10 7.S O L I D A R I S C H ES T A D T We will never  accept poverty Dortmund  is the social capital  of Germany.  That is in our DNA. In Dortmund,  everyone  gets the solidarity  they need. All urban projects  must  therefore  follow two guidelines:  Creating  solidarity  and innovation.  Dortmund  must be the modern  city that everyone  afford.  This is about  participation,  education  and sustainability  with holistic  projects  instead  of changing  measures.  As with the labor market,  we want to set tough  and sustainable  targets  in a social conference  for all issues  up to 2030, from homelessness  to poverty  in old age. Poverty  affects  women in particular The best measure  to protect  women  from poverty  is better pay for many professions  and improving  women's  opportunities  in the labor market.  We will  always   for this in Berlin.  In Dortmund,  the aim is to create  opportunities  in which family  and career  are compatible.  This also includes  providing   suitable  and flexible  offers,  enabling  training  and further  education  with childcare  and converting  more jobs from part-time  to full-time. Violence  has no place  in Dortmund Although  crime on the decline,  conflicts  are leading  to violence  more and more quickly.  The police  in Dortmund  do a very good and  successful  job. It is our social to look after the victims.  We want to expand  the free, anonymous  and low-threshold  advice  centers  and  shelters.  We want to develop  our own program  for Dortmund  schools  to teach non-violent  dispute  resolution  and set up a bullying  contact   point for teachers  and pupils,  which can  found both on the Internet  and in the schoolyard. Dortmund  remains  colorful Everyone  who comes  to Dortmund  and wants  to live here with us for good or just for a short time is welcome,  regardless  of their social and  cultural  background.  Dortmund  has always  been shaped  by immigration  and we owe many buildings  and much of Dortmund's  economic   success  to our new and old neighbors.  For us Social  Democrats,  it has long been clear that integration  is not a one-way  street and that Dortmund   is definitely  a winner  when it  to benefiting  from its new residents  and their experiences.  For us, integration  does not mean renouncing  one's own cultural   identity,  but rather different  cultures  growing  together  while preserving  their own cultural  identity.  This is how our city was created  and this is how  our city develops  and changes  every day. The Ruhr region,  and our city in particular,  has always  been a colorful  mix of long-established,  new and  short-term  residents  of Dortmund,  which is why a welcoming  culture  is already  a reality  here today.  We are grateful  for this and will  everything   we can to maintain  and further  develop  it. All people  in Dortmund  should  be guaranteed  the same opportunity  to pursue  an educational  career   that matches  their individual  abilities  and achievements.  Social  criteria  should  not play a role in educational  progression.