EDUCATI ON PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS12 8.D O R T M U N DM U S SH A U P T S T A  D T H E K I N D E RW E R D E N Turning district  libraries  into citizen  schools  of the future Children  are our future.  Therefore,  we can never accept  that children  grow up in poverty.  They should  no longer  ask why something  is not  possible,  but only when it is possible.  The places  for them and their families  should   our district  libraries,  which we want to expand  - or build -  in every district.  They should  become  the new advice  center  and first point of contact  for families  and the places  for children   conquer.  When  people  ask where  they can learn and take their first steps in digitalization,  this is where  they should  go. But it's not just children  who should  be helped  -  parents  who are overwhelmed  should  also offered  a place to go. The concept  of daycare  centers  as family  centers  offers another  good  starting  point for providing  families  with better support  and advice.  We also want to start here and expand  and better equip these centers.   Addressing  parents  and children  close to home and in person  offers a good opportunity  them to experience  interesting  events  and educational   opportunities  for their children  as well as personal  advice  and support  in familiar  surroundings.  The funding  provided  by the state to date is in no way  sufficient  for this. Dortmund  cares - it's in our DNA! Best education In recent  years,  we have invested  massively  in childcare  and the modernization  of our schools.  In a growing  city, there is no question  that this  must continue  at a rapid pace. In the next decade,  the focus will no longer  on expansion  alone.  Quality  will be decisive  and this is where   need  to invest  quickly  and well. Our aim  to  every child and young  person  with the best possible  support  and education.  Educational  pathways   remain  open through  longer  joint learning.  We will realize  this path by expanding  and founding  new comprehensive  schools  in line with parents'   wishes.  We will continue  to expand  support  for primary  and secondary  schools  and the teachers  working  there in the process  of inclusion   through  advisory  centers.  All schools  will receive  fast internet  connections  and high-performance  WLAN.  Access  to digital  information  will be  made possible  for learners  in all schools.  Schools  will be supported  in linking  learning  processes  with digital  media  in a planned  and  meaningful  way. Schools  will be equipped  with the appropriate  hardware  and support  and service  for the networks  and devices  will be  ensured.  There is a social imbalance  in Dortmund's  urban landscape  that counter  to our claim of equal opportunities  in education.  For us, this also means   setting  priorities  and, above  all, treating  inequality  unequally.  Daycare  centers  and schools  in districts  with poor structural  conditions  in particular  must  be better equipped  in terms of staffing  and funding.  We will therefore  establish  a municipal  social index with the means  at our disposal.  For us,  however,  the one does not exclude  the other. Throughout  the city, good staff, a wide range of play and childcare  facilities  and freedom  of  choice  in terms of childcare  times must become  Dortmund's  trademark.  For us, this also means  that open all-day  schooling  in Dortmund  is not  only available  to everyone,  but that it becomes  a genuine  all-day  educational  program.  Where  the state government  fails to act, we will take  action,  for example  with regard  to school  social work, inclusion,  free and healthy  meals  and free public  transport  for all pupils. Children  and young  people  have  rights  and they should  demand them  loudly For us, student  representatives  are the first point of contact  for the interests  of students  in our city. We want to involve  them more closely  in the  city's political  bodies  through  ongoing  dialog.  The same applies  to the youth and trainee  representatives.  In addition,  we will set up a city-wide   Dortmund  Youth  Parliament,  which receive  its own budget  each year. This will allow it to spend  money  on projects  of its own choosing  - and  incidentally,  the Senior  Citizens'  Advisory  Council  will also always  receive  the same amount  of funding,  which is not the case with the Youth   Parliament.