CITIZENS PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS15 10.TO LISTEN  , C U M M E R S ,M A C H E N Revitalizing the Dortmund  consensus  in a major  Dortmund  conference It was the Dortmund  consensus   made the successful  change  possible  in the first place.  When  business,  churches,  social organizations,  the  city, science  and others  come together  regularly,  a lot can be achieved.  This consensus  can be seen and found again and again in the city. We  want to this spirit again and again,  especially  in these turbulent  times. That's  why we want a major Dortmund  conference  at which the major guidelines    developed  by consensus. Clubs  need  more  weight Volunteering  has a long tradition  in Dortmund.  There  are many contacts  and a good exchange  of ideas.  However,  we want people  to listen  even better.  Central  contact  points  in new neighborhood  centers  are intended  better coordinate  work with each other and with the city. We also  want to set up an advisory  board for associations  so that their concerns  can be addressed  and implemented  more quickly. Citizen participation With nordwärts,  we have tried out many new methods  of listening  to a wide range of topics in the first five years.  In the second  half of the decade   project  until 2025, we now want to roll out the most successful  models  and  on to doing things  better.  The implementation  of the "Dortmund   app", where  citizens   quickly  and easily find out about local developments  and their opportunities  for digital  and analog  participation,  will  also central.  We will continue  to initiate  citizen  participation  projects  after the end of the nordwärts  project . SPD on site We don't want to exclude  ourselves  from listening.  We are the party that cares for people  for a reason.  Our office-holders  and elected   representatives  will be regularly available to talk to citizens in local office hours. For good ideas, we also want to set up a "Caring for You" platform  for Dortmund  on the Internet. Our neighbourhood  campaign  is running  successfully  and our goal is to launch  it throughout  the city.