HEALTH PROGRAM  FOR THE 2020 LOCAL  ELECTIONS14 9.P R O D U C T I O N I S T N O T A L L , B U T O H N EE C O N  O M I C A T I O NI S T A L L E SN O T H E S Sports  city no. 1 - also on site Alongside  housing,  education  and mobility,  we will make the modernization  and maintenance  of our sports  facilities  the fourth major focus of  investment.  Exercise  and sport are still the best way to stay healthy.  We have presented  a plan to bring all sports  facilities  in Dortmund   up to scratch.  Now we need to implement  it. Happy  retirement Health  and mobility  in old age is a valuable  asset.  We want to set up a free service  in the swimming  pools for children  under 14 and people  over  60 so that they can go swimming  at least once a week. In addition,  at least one of the city's parks should  have a senior  citizens'  fitness  trail with  age-appropriate  equipment. Securing supply  everywhere We have repositioned  the municipal  hospital  despite  the chronic  failure  of the state's  investment  funding  and the misguided  incentives  of the per-case   fee system  and are continuously  modernizing  its facilities.  We stand for a permanent  commitment  by the city as the responsible  body. At the  same time, cooperation  talks on the range of services  with all hospitals  in Dortmund  are necessary  in order to prevent  pointless  competition  and  blockades.  Both the spatial,  material  and personnel  resources  of the city's care facilities  must be significantly  increased  so that they  become   a modern  and future-oriented  employer  and meet the personnel  challenges  of the care landscape.  By expanding  medical  centers  and care  cooperatives  in the neighborhoods,  we want to further  improve  the quality  of care close to home.  To this end, we want to make greater  use of  digitalization  to increase  quality. Children's  health  has top priority We want to actively  tackle the avoidable  causes  of poor health  (obesity,  tooth decay,  lack of coordination  and physical  activity).  It is important  that children   are well cared for regardless  of their parents'  wallets.  That is why we want to  the networks  between  parents,  schools,  the city and pediatricians  in the  neighborhoods.  We want to promote  healthy  eating  and exercise  by providing  good advice  and information,  but the local services  must also available  and  accessible  to everyone.  We want to greatly  expand  this. The child health  goal adopted  by the city council  is to implemented  through  concrete   programs  under the leadership  of the health  department  with the many committed  providers  (daycare  centers,  schools)  and other partners.