The city of Dortmund has shown in the past that it can change courageously and decisively.
Dortmund is growing and becoming younger again.
We have been investing record amounts for years.
We are going back to the neighbourhoods as a city, with new places, better schools, and repaired streets.
Thomas Westphal is the Mayor of the City of Dortmund for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025.
His programme is clear and concrete, as we are known for.
Because responsibility means exactly this: talking to all people in the entire city, taking the concerns of the neighbourhoods seriously, solving problems.
Dortmunder Stadtentwicklungsgesellschaft (DSG) has been able to launch the construction of affordable, modern and sustainable housing.
The first housing construction projects have since started and many more projects will follow in the coming years.
We will continue to maintain the mandatory 30 percent quota for publicly subsidized housing in new construction projects.
The public sector must become more involved in the housing market, including by purchasing existing homes.
SPD Dortmund’s programme for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025, modular construction, alternative building materials and the consideration of the Hamburg standard can provide valuable support.
We must not be wasteful with our limited space.
That is why we want to prioritise the construction of multi-storey apartments – with attractive and barrier-free living space.
We will connect every new building project to public transport, with a connection to the cycle network and, of course, to the fibre-optic network.
Social Democrats want to meet the demand for places in daycare centers and child daycare in Dortmund.
They will abolish the daycare fees in order to enable participation and equal opportunities from the beginning.
The city of Dortmund already takes over the share of the operator for newer institutions.
We will also continue to expand the municipal child day care center operator FABIDO.
The goal of creating good framework conditions for families is at the forefront.
The lack of reliability of the system is a daily challenge for working families.
The regional economy also suffers from the additional shortage of skilled workers.
A secure base financing would solve many problems.
Pay increases must be compensated promptly and completely.
Dortmund can have modern schools.
We place great emphasis on equal opportunities for all children and young people.
We do not ask where someone comes from, but where someone wants to go in the future!
We are investing in the future and will use the Dortmund share of the new “infrastructure special fund’ in a targeted manner for investments in the education sector.
In the past five years, we have been able to modernise many previously dilapidated school buildings and construct urgently needed extensions.
We will not skimp on this, but will invest consistently and continuously.
SPD Dortmund aims to create a rhythmic full-day school throughout the city.
In the short term, concepts for the multifunctional use of classrooms must be combined with the expansion of the open day.
The best offers for children in the areas of sport, health, nutrition, music, art, theater, self-confidence and digitalization must be systematically networked on site.
School social workers offer individual advice and help to students with personal, family or social problems.
School social work helps to prevent conflicts, violence or bullying at an early stage.
We want to promote interdisciplinary thinking and strengthen the self-efficacy experiences of students.
Extracurricular learning locations and offers are a matter of course for us.
The project to establish a "Dortmund movement model" for the holistic movement, sports and talent promotion for children and young people will be evaluated in 2026 and, if possible, continued in other suitable districts.
There is a shortage of youth centers, meeting places and leisure activities.
Meeting places for young people must be made possible.
The infrastructure of free children and youth work must be maintained and strengthened.
Playgrounds should be accessible to all children and designed to be barrier-free.
The city of Dortmund is ensuring that the revised playing field regulations are enforced.
The aim is that all playing fields that fall within the scope of the regulations will meet the new requirements.
We reject the use of ultrasonic transmitters to drive young people away.
We want to extend the successful model of the Nordstadtliga to as many districts of the city as possible.
We will create more decentralised offers and places for people to meet each other in the individual districts of the city.
Voluntary work in clubs is an important pillar of social life in the neighbourhoods.
It creates community, promotes cohesion and enriches the cultural and sporting offerings locally.
We will help to find spaces for volunteer activities and make the existing offer more visible and better coordinated.
Health is a crucial factor for a fulfilled and equal, participatory life.
We want to create low-threshold offers for the health of people living here.
The number of people in need of care continues to rise, the need for support is becoming more extensive and more diverse.
We must therefore resolutely address the shortage of skilled workers.
We will promote volunteer work and improve its appreciation – where possible, also financially.
SPD Dortmund will fight homelessness through a combination of social support, preventive and intelligent individual political measures.
We see addiction prevention and support for people with drug, medication or alcohol addictions as a central social task.
Young adults and women must be given special attention here.
Antifascism has always been a cornerstone of social democratic thinking and action.
We will refuse to cooperate with representatives of the AfD in any form.
We stand by our humanitarian responsibility and will continue to accept people who have to flee their home.
Queer people need places to develop.
Education and information are essential for a diverse Dortmund.
Equality and equal rights for all genders are still not a reality.
Women are still structurally disadvantaged in many areas of life.
The sexual exploitation of minors for the financial enrichment of third parties is not “child prostitution”, but a serious crime.
We will continue to support the Mitternachtsmission e.V.
financially and will develop strategies to combat this exploitation and violence together with all relevant actors.
Children and young people should be more involved in shaping Dortmund.
An application for the title of European Youth Capital will help to strengthen participation formats.
Dortmund is a growing city with more than 615,000 inhabitants.
The city's economy is diversified, i.e.
broadly based.
The image of the "economic centipede" is adhered to.
A maximum diversification of the Dortmund economic landscape is our clear goal.
We are committed to the Dortmund steel site.
Domestic production and further processing of climate-friendly steel is strategically necessary.
Dortmund needs economic areas for modern, future-proof businesses in the real economy.
The strategic acquisition and targeted development of land in Dortmund and outside the city will support and promote the city's economic development.
The fight against long-term and youth unemployment is and remains a central social and economic challenge for us here in the Ruhr area.
Young people in particular need prospects, educational opportunities and targeted support in the transition to the labor market.
We will continue and develop the municipal employment strategy.
SPD Dortmund Program for the Municipal Elections on September 14, 2025.
We will continue and, if necessary, make permanent good projects for promoting employment and combating unemployment to attract skilled workers.
We will continue to expand our successful technology center model and resolutely drive forward and support new locations of innovation.
The attractiveness of our city center is crucial to maintaining it as a lively center of social life.
We need quality of stay, green spaces, diverse cultural and educational offers and good accessibility for all.
Retail and local trade play a central role in lively and liveable neighbourhoods.
Our goal is to better connect the various modes of transport.
We will ambitiously expand public bus and light rail transport.
The transfer times must also be noticeably shortened on holidays and at off-peak times.
We want a local transport system that is friendly to working people and that is close to their lives.
The offer to the non-VRR neighboring municipalities such as Schwerte or Unna is insufficient and therefore difficult or even impossible to use for people with early, late and night shifts.
SPD Dortmund for the municipal elections on 14 September 2025.
Aim is to continue to expand the cycle network, to create safe, as wide and clearly marked cycle lanes as possible.
We will create safe connections between the districts and the city centre with the new cycle route system that is currently being implemented.
We demand that social ticket offers must never be more expensive than the monthly basic allowance for mobility in basic security.
We want to keep the passing cars out of the residential areas and the immediate inner city through clever traffic control systems.
Unsafe intersections, missing safety strips or poor lighting affect the safety perception of road users, and we want to remedy this as part of the road offensive.
We will continue to ensure that the parking garages in the city are always cheaper than the above-ground parking spaces.
We want an administrative office that is there for the people when they need it.
SPD candidate: We will work towards improving transparency, attention and recognition of voluntary work through better public relations.
We will also support the next generation of volunteers.
The fire department and aid organizations also make a very important contribution to the safety of people in Dortmund every day.
We want to strengthen and secure this voluntary work.
We want to reduce littering from carelessly discarded cigarette butts in a positive, motivating way.
To this end, we will set up cigarette ashtrays in the form of ‘question boxes’ (so-called “ballot bins’) We want to strengthen public relations and campaigns for targeted awareness-raising, education on proper disposal and the consequences of offenses.
Dortmund has one of the largest green areas of any large city in Germany, with 63 percent.
The promotion of renewable energies is at the forefront, particularly the expansion of photovoltaic systems on the roofs of public and private buildings.
The consequences of climate change affect the weakest members of society first and hardest.
Dortmund must develop into a sponge city: by promoting the desilting of sealed urban areas.
The city's litter bins must be made rat-proof.
We want to achieve temporary and permanent shading on schoolyards, playgrounds and other public spaces ideally in combination with solar modules.
We want to create more biotope systems, wildflower meadows, birdhouses and insect hotels and significantly reduce light pollution.
This also includes the promotion of urban agriculture, the support of ecological farms, urban farm projects and the principle of “edible” cities.
SPD Dortmund Programme for the Municipal Election on 14 September 2025.
Campaigning for the introduction of the Dortmund Card to provide children, young people and families with low incomes with free or heavily discounted access to the city's leisure and cultural facilities.
Promoting local cultural diversity and protecting Dortmund's diversity of scene districts, clubs, bars and small programme cinemas.
The corner pub is a cultural asset in the Ruhr area.
SPD candidate: Dortmund can handle digitalisation and modern administration.
We want to make all municipal services digitally accessible in the long term, where possible.
With over 220 online services, the city of Dortmund already has the largest online portfolio of any municipality.
We will increasingly implement the principles of “Open Data” and ‘Open Government’ in practice in the future.
The city’s Open Data portal will be user-friendly and expand it into a genuine transparency platform.
The city of Dortmund is the largest employer in the city.
We will continue to gradually convert all mini-jobs in the Dortmund municipal authority to employment relationships that are subject to social insurance.
We want to reduce the use of fixed-term contracts and the employment of freelancers to a minimum.
Simplified and less bureaucratic procurement processes will benefit local craftsmen in particular.
A streamlining reform of the municipal parking space regulations can also contribute to fewer restrictions for construction investors.
Dortmund will become a smart city.
We will set up a comprehensive digital city map as an interactive map with information on construction sites, free parking spaces, charging stations, etc.
And we will use IoT sensors for better control of waste disposal, street lighting, air quality, traffic.
With a traffic data analysis, we want to contribute to the improvement of public transport and traffic flow.
The public, free and ad-free high-speed WLAN as well as Freifunk in public places and in buildings used by the city must be further expanded.
Dortmund will not ‘earn money with our citizens’ with the real estate tax and keep the revenue base from this constant until at least 2030.
The tax rate for business taxes should also remain stable.
We understand the municipal companies as an integral part of the municipal self-administration.