Dortmund has had a clear compass in Dortmund for 74 years: solidarity and progress.
After our city was destroyed as a result of the Nazi barbarism, we rebuilt it together.
The new decade needs new answers.
Dortmund must be the big city in Germany that everyone can afford – that is our claim.
We want to eliminate the pressure of profit and construction in the current planning processes.
We also want to build, advise and support networks of individual homeowners.
We expect clear guidelines from the state and the federal government.
The housing industry needs a legally defined “new non-profit sector” that clearly divides profit interests and non-profits.
We need to have a political and strategic discussion as a whole city about the further development of the no longer marketable housing stock.
We want to create neighbourhoods for families, young singles and couples, as well as households between family and retirement throughout the city.
We want to use the next plan to determine how we can make the city climate-proof for tomorrow, even today.
Our green spaces must be adapted to climate change in the coming years.
Whether it snows, rains or the next heatwave comes, we need to prepare our city for it.
The Climate-Air Action Program 2030 provides for a 55 percent reduction in CO2 emissions in the city.
By 2030, Germany will have to meet the Paris climate protection targets.
Dortmund is the only city that has successfully completed a coal-fired power station without subsidies.
The ongoing expansion of the heat supply in Dortmund is a model for the whole of Germany.
The city will save around 45,000 tonnes of CO2 per year from 2023 onwards.
The area of mobility will be the challenge of the next decade when it comes to climate protection.
Dortmund is the No.
1 for research in logistics in Europe.
It is therefore time that we in Europe also become the role model for a new city logistics.
As a strong logistics location, Dortmund can be a pioneer for urban transport.
We want to continuously reduce the burden of heavy traffic by 5 percent every year.
By 2030, the burden should be at least halved – and the damage to the roads will also be significantly reduced.
The goal is clear: a 365-euro ticket for the entire Ruhr area.
The improvement of public transport and cycle path network must be designed from the bottom up.
Long-term unemployment is decreasing, but it remains the most pressing task in our city.
We need suitable offers not only after leaving school, but already in school, in order to tackle the issue of unemployment and lack of prospects early on.
Digital infrastructure has priority: fiber optic network, 5G and widely available, open WLAN are of central importance.
Dortmund must become a high-speed city!
Local retail needs public space and vice versa.
Our next goal is open WLAN throughout the entire city center, including the trade fair and stadium.
Dortmund craftsmen are tradition and above all the future.
No area does more for inclusion, integration and innovation in everyday life.
A map will be created on which the fearful spaces are recorded.
We will work to ensure that a permanent police presence on bicycles is created in Dortmund's Nordstadt.
We see the neo-Nazis in Dortmund as a problem for the entire city and as a threat to our open and tolerant society.
The external effect is devastating for Dortmund.
Dortmund is the social capital of Germany.
We will never accept poverty.
In Dortmund, everyone gets the solidarity they need.
Violence has no place in Dortmund.
The police in Dortmund are doing a very good and successful job.
We want to set hard and sustainable goals for all topics by 2030.
We want to expand the free, anonymous and low-threshold counselling centres and shelters.
We will establish the first staff unit in Germany to combat loneliness.
No one should be lonely in Dortmund – this is our goal.
Turning neighbourhood libraries into citizens' schools of the future will make children our future.
We can never accept that children grow up in poverty.
They should no longer ask why something is not possible, but only when it is possible.
Dortmund has invested massively in the care of children and the modernisation of its schools in recent years.
In the next decade, it will not only be about expansion, but also about quality, and investment must be made quickly and well.
Our goal is to enable every child and young person to receive the best possible support and education.
Good personnel, a broad range of play and care options and freedom of choice in care times must become Dortmund’s trademark throughout the city.
In the summer, the city belongs to families, young people and children.
We want to bundle all the offers for children in the city in a large, free program and expand it for every summer holiday.
New highlights will be, for example, a city Olympics as the finale of the summer games in the districts.
Exercise and sport are still the best means for health.
We want to offer children under 14 and people over 60 free access to swimming pools.
At least one of the city's parks should have a senior fitness trail with age-appropriate equipment.
By expanding doctor centres and care cooperatives in the neighbourhoods, we want to further expand the quality of care close to home.
We stand for a long-term commitment by the city as the owner.
We want to revive this spirit again and again, especially in these turbulent times.
We do not want to be left out when it comes to listening.
For us, every person has the right to culture.
We see the task of the city here to create spaces and opportunities where culture and people can develop.
Culture from Dortmund should stand for something new and exciting.
There should be more cultural offers on site and cultural creators should receive more opportunities in the city.
Children and young people in particular need open access to culture.
Nightlife in Dortmund must once again be a real and new experience.
Dortmund Òle, Pokémon Go, Juicy Beats, Festi Ramazan and Comic-Con have shown that there is more to come.
We want to test new payment models for the city's leisure and cultural offerings.
Instead of paying at the entrance, everyone should pay as much as they want or can at the exit.
Public services must always be accessible to everyone and must meet the highest standards.
We will intensify the city's digitalisation efforts in the coming years.
By 2030, we will have digitalised all municipal services so that, in particular, matters of citizens' services can be easily and quickly dealt with from home.
We will continue to campaign for