The new decade needs new answers.
We have had a clear compass in Dortmund for 74 years: solidarity and progress.
After our city was destroyed as a result of the Nazi barbarism, we rebuilt it together.
The year 1966, when BVB was in the final against Liverpool, was our first big year.
When the first crisis clouds came shortly thereafter, we built the first university.
After that, we not only made the sky blue again, but also brought new jobs to the city.
When the further crises came and the large companies disappeared, we as a city always found an answer, from the Westfalenhütte to the technology center to the PHOENIX lake.
Dortmund was often declared dead and we always got up again.
All of this we have achieved in Dortmund together, and not only the SPD was involved.
But we have never shirked our responsibility.
We wanted it and we got the confidence for it.
We want to apply for this program for another 5 years.
Affordable housing Dortmund must be the big city in Germany that everyone can afford – that is our claim.
The central task for us is the medium- and long-term securing of an offer of affordable housing.
We are aware that the demand for affordable housing will remain high, as the social housing stock is always becoming smaller.
We already know today that we need to build 2,000 new and affordable homes every year to meet the needs of a growing city.
We need more homes for young people, WG-capable homes for students, spacious homes for families and more housing projects that bring the generations together.
To achieve this, we will strengthen social housing construction in the existing stock and in new construction.
We will actively and more quickly develop building land for new homes via a “Dortmunder Wohnen service company”.
We will also set up our own municipal housing construction program via DOGEWO.
These and other concrete measures, such as the aim of achieving a quota of up to 30 percent in publicly subsidised housing in Dortmund, will be part of a municipal “overall housing strategy”, in which we particularly want to involve local cooperatives.
We want to eliminate the pressure of profit and construction in the current planning processes.
This would allow the neighbours of a new district to be involved with their ideas and questions from the outset.
In addition, we want to eliminate the tax advantages of the sale of private housing companies.
We also want to build, advise and support networks of individual homeowners.
In this way, we create a broad alliance for good housing in Dortmund.
We expect clear guidelines from the state and the federal government: there should be a legally fixed upper limit for rent increases.
The cap on rent increases must be reduced from 20 percent in three years to 15 percent throughout Germany.
The notice period for the conversion of rental to owner-occupied apartments should remain at five years.
The housing industry needs a legally defined “new non-profit sector” that clearly divides profit interests and non-profit interests.
We need to have a political and strategic discussion as a whole city about the further development of the no longer marketable housing stock.
The conditions – such as the so-called “scrap properties” Hannibal II and the high-rise building in Kielstraße – must be counteracted in good time by the housing supervisory authority of the city.
We want to check and implement the courses of action formulated in the neighbourhood analyses for each individual neighbourhood in Dortmund.
Another building block is new forms of participation for residents, for example through neighbourhood funds, and an expansion of the municipal housing supervisory authority.
Good living requires good building Houses in Dortmund should be energy-efficient.
The city of Dortmund should stand by the owners as a reliable and competent partner in the consultation and promotion of energy-efficient conversion.
We are striving for further improvements in the barrier-free nature of the stock (for example Installation of lifts) and the promotion of the conversion of the stock to be suitable for the elderly beyond the requirements of the The key factor will be to make land available more easily, quickly and cost-effectively.
To this end, a municipal service company is to be established.
Developing neighbourhoods better The development of neighbourhoods as a whole will be of crucial importance for urban development in the future.
This is characterised by the fact that, as in the past, continuous spatial growth must be controlled.
This starting point places high demands on urban development policy, which must analyse the opportunities and risks of neighbourhoods and settlements and develop solutions.
On the other hand, it must not lose sight of the development of the city as a whole.
Our goal is a good and people-connecting mix of the city.
Through a “master plan for living space” for the entire city, we want to provide targeted incentives to create neighbourhoods for families, young singles and couples, as well as households between family and retirement throughout the city.
No speculation Speculation with land is to be prevented.
The sale of municipal land to private housing investors is to be largely avoided.
The allocation is to be carried out either by means of a ground lease or by sale with a granted right of repurchase.
At the same time, we are striving for a municipal land reserve policy in order to curb the enormous increases in land prices.
The existing plots of land should be offered to the non-profit cooperatives and the DOGEWO at good conditions.
In the allocation of these municipal plots of land, we will contractually stipulate that only affordable housing is to be built.
Climate change and the city Climate change is not only real, but is also already noticeable.
Better fresh air, more greenery and water in the city have been the result of good politics in recent years.
We must continue to keep this in our sights and make Dortmund fit for the challenges of climate change.
Our green spaces must be adapted to climate change in the coming years.
We need the right greenery and we will even need more, for example, 1,000 new trees every year in addition to an increase in our forest stock.
However, we not only need a good climate protection plan, we must also think about climate adaptation.
We want to use the next plan to determine how we can make the city climate-proof for tomorrow, even today.
To do this, we need to set new and high standards for public buildings and our infrastructure.
Whether it snows, rains or the next heatwave comes, we need to prepare our city for it.
This investment program is also intended to strengthen our local craftsmen and women through municipal contracts.
We need to think globally and act locally.
The Climate-Air Action Program 2030 provides for a 55 percent reduction in CO2 emissions in the city.
We want to see if we can achieve more.
If we want to achieve more for the climate in our city, we need to take action on the ground.
This includes not only education and training, but also support for individuals or initiatives that want to do something.
For example, we want to ensure that the agricultural land that belongs to the city is better utilized: as open organic gardens for citizens.
We want to support these and other initiatives with the Climate Network Dortmund.
More quality for our natural treasures The sky above us is blue again, the Emscher is slowly becoming a river again and many of the old industrial sites have been replaced.
In 2027, Dortmund will become the location of the International Garden Exhibition.
Here, we as a city will show that we have succeeded in bringing together the economy and the environment for both sides.
But we want this new quality throughout the entire city – whether it is the zoo, parks, allotments or natural landscapes.
We will put in place a comprehensive programme to promote and enhance these green treasures in our city.
Meeting climate targets By 2030, Germany will have to meet the Paris climate protection targets.
This means going further than before.
It is good that Dortmund is the only city that has successfully completed a coal-fired power station without subsidies.
We are currently supporting our neighbours in a very practical way to achieve this.
With the Master Plan for Energy Future, we have set out on the path to complete the changeover by 2030.
We are also particularly strong in the heat sector.
The ongoing expansion of the heat supply in Dortmund is a model for the whole of Germany.
The municipal supplier Dortmunder Energie- und Wasserversorgung GmbH (DEW21) is investing a total of more than 100 million euros in the conversion of the heat supply over the next few years.
By modernising the heat network in the Dortmund city centre and incorporating industrial waste heat, the city will save around 45,000 tonnes of CO2 per year from 2023 onwards – equivalent to the emissions of around 3,000 cars.
One of the next steps will be the construction of a cold network, so as not to create the next problem with air conditioning.
So, we have done our homework when it comes to energy and heat.
We will continue to push the expansion of photovoltaic systems on Dortmund roofs.
That is why it is clear to us that the area of mobility will be the challenge of the next decade when it comes to climate protection in Dortmund.
We want to put users at the centre.
We do not want to dictate which means of But we want to give everyone the opportunity to really choose it.
This applies in particular to the bicycle.
Here we will have to achieve even more: a closed network of high quality and safety.
But not only is such a closed cycle path network missing in Dortmund.
Our standard, which we want to develop a new traffic system for our city, is not the professional cyclist.
We must think from the weakest user: children and families.
For these we need above all a safe cycle path system with wide and clearly marked lanes.
This also includes new inner-city cycle paths for us, for example parallel to the B1 and along the Wall, as well as good opportunities to quickly cross the already car-free city center and the numerous parks.
We will also take care of safe, covered and lockable bicycle parking spaces in sufficient numbers.
Dortmund can do it: logistics becomes a local solution Dortmund is the No.
1 for research in logistics in Europe.
It is therefore time that we in Europe also become the role model for a new city logistics.
Despite the increasing online trade, people and neighbourhoods must be sustainably relieved.
That is why we need strict guidelines here with regard to noise and pollution.
As a strong logistics location, Dortmund can be a pioneer for urban transport.
With the new transport development plan, we want to continuously reduce the burden of heavy traffic by 5 percent every year.
By 2030, the burden should be at least halved – and the damage to the roads will also be significantly reduced.
We want to make the traffic light systems more intelligent over a large area in order to reduce standing with unnecessary emissions.
Public transport: Time for new and real solutions Dortmund has done its homework and will receive new and better e-buses and trains from 2021 – but that is not enough.
We want Dortmund to also take on a pioneering role in the field of public transport for digital offers.
For example, we need a better schedule on many sections, the extension or expansion of some railway lines, more night traffic and the expansion of the H-Bahn, in order to move more people.
But many people commute and the traffic does not end at the city limits, but often enough in delays.
If you then ask yourself why it does not work in the Ruhr area, then you always end up with everyone pointing the finger at each other.
In particular, the bus connections must no longer end at the city limits.
With a society for new mobility, we want to achieve a significant expansion of the network and the offer, which at the same time becomes cheaper.
The goal is clear: a 365-euro ticket for the entire Ruhr area.
Developed from the bottom up The improvement of public transport and cycle path network must be designed from the bottom up.
However, it requires not only good ideas, but also implementation perspectives on site.
To this end, we want to set up a transportation office that coordinates and takes responsibility for implementation within the administration.
We want to have the courage to try out a wide range of concepts and ideas for improving living spaces and mobility.
It should be possible to try out ideas for revitalising public spaces as well as pedestrian areas or traffic-calmed zones for a limited period of time.
The experiences with these measures should then be used to decide together with residents on the further implementation, continuation or rejection of the measures.
Our priorities: Reducing long-term and youth unemployment We have all gone through a tough time together as a city.
Only in this way were we able to halve unemployment in recent years – in a growing city.
Long-term unemployment is decreasing, but it remains the most pressing task in our city.
The Dortmund model for the social labour market is so good that it has now become a role model for the whole of Germany.
Now we want to become the role model that has solved this problem by 2030.
This applies in particular to youth unemployment.
Here we want to go new ways.
The successful model of training coordination in the Hauptschule Husen will now be available to all those who have completed Hauptschule.
With a "learning factory" we will create a completely new location for the prospects of young people.
We need suitable offers not only after leaving school, but already in school, in order to tackle the issue of unemployment and lack of prospects early on.
We are taking into account the important role of the Berufskollegs in vocational preparation and the qualification of young people for higher school-leaving certificates by expanding and providing workshops and specialist rooms.
The still outstanding renovation or possible new construction of three Berufskollegs will be tackled quickly.
A stronghold for start-ups and small and medium-sized enterprises We have successfully come through the structural change by focusing specifically on the traditional Westphalian small and medium-sized enterprises and new start-ups from the world of science.
Both are not a contradiction, but are firmly intertwined in Dortmund.
The Technologiezentrum Dortmund is the successful model in Europe for this path.
With this seed cell we want to continue to grow across the whole city These will not be lighthouses in the middle of nowhere, but new germ cells for the districts and networks.
Companies will find a home there and not just a home market, because in Dortmund, the economy and the urban society go hand in hand for the future.
Digital infrastructure has priority: fiber optic network, 5G and widely available, open WLAN are of central importance for the location of Dortmund as a digital center.
This applies to both people and companies.
That is why we have started a process that aims to achieve real fiber optic expansion.
After all, it is about our future.
We want to go even further.
Our next goal is open WLAN throughout the entire city center, including the trade fair and stadium, and all buses and trains.
Dortmund must become a high-speed city!
Local retail needs public space and vice versa.
The retail sector is changing.
The internet is leading to major changes here.
At the same time, however, a lively city needs exactly this local trade, which is always also the driving force for public space.
But if this public space does not invite you to linger, if vacancies are taking over and even the weekly market is no longer really visited, then we are losing something.
That is why we have started initiatives to address public spaces, weekly markets and vacancies.
We want to bring these ideas forward in order to redesign each district individually and strengthen the local economy – because it is the backbone of our city centres.
Promoting Dortmund craftsmen Dortmund craftsmen are tradition and above all the future.
No area does more for inclusion, integration and innovation in everyday life.
In order to promote local craftsmen, we want to further develop the awarding of municipal contracts – through new goals and significantly simpler processes.
If this goes faster, it is not only good for the companies, then it also goes faster in implementation.
Eliminating fear spaces “I’m not going to go there now …” This is a thought that many people know.
We cannot accept this.
Fearful spaces can only be eliminated through a good mix.
Every place that causes fear needs its own solution.
Sometimes it is about lighting, sometimes about more presence of the city and police, and in other places it is only about broken windows on a neglected building.
Here we will build a completely new field of tasks in the administration in order to bundle the responsibilities.
The rule in the work will be: transparency is the highest rule.
In the first step, a map will be created on which the fearful spaces are recorded.
Regularly there will be news about the current state of the place.
Then it can be followed what has happened and whether it has helped.
We will work to ensure that a permanent police presence on bicycles is created in Dortmund's Nordstadt in order to combat fearful spaces there more intensively.
Clean city A carelessly discarded cigarette butt – the napkin from the curry sausage falls on the ground and no one picks it up.
The plastic film from the chocolate bar is so sticky-light that it ends up next to the trash can.
The cleanliness of a city is quickly lost if we don't all pay attention to it.
A well-equipped EDG helps, a "Dreckpetze" app on the smartphone helps, but we have to get to the core of the problem: ourselves.
We will start a campaign, also with the goal of having at least 5 percent less dirt on the street every year.
By 2030 we want to have at least half of it removed.
Natural instead of wild growth When you walk through our streets, the greenery of the city on the street sometimes looks like no one really cares.
It often looks like random wild growth.
That's why we also restructured the city administration in 2019.
But of course that's not enough.
So we must be prepared to put more money into care.
This is not just a programme of opportunities for new and good work, but also eliminates jobs that are an invitation to throw things away, that obstruct pedestrian and cycle paths or are considered inaccessible and unsafe.
Anyone who makes a living by threatening others, who even makes a business model out of it, has nothing to lose from us.
This applies to all extremists.
We see the neo-Nazis in Dortmund as a problem for the entire city and as a threat to our open and tolerant society.
The external effect is devastating for Dortmund.
We will not accept this!
To this end, we will strengthen the people and groups who work on this every day and have already achieved a lot.
In addition, we want to build a new offer for Dortmund schools to strengthen political education.
We want to continue to use and strengthen the already good experiences from institutions such as the municipal coordination office for diversity, tolerance and democracy, as well as for example the Quartiersdemokraten and BackUp-ComeBack.
We will never accept poverty.
Dortmund is the social capital of Germany.
This is in our DNA.
In Dortmund, everyone gets the solidarity they need.
All municipal projects must therefore follow two guidelines: create solidarity and innovation.
Dortmund must be the modern city that everyone can afford.
This is about participation, education and sustainability with holistic projects instead of changing measures.
As with the labor market, we want to set hard and sustainable goals for all topics by 2030 in a social conference, from homelessness to old-age poverty.
Poverty mainly affects women.
The best measure to protect women from poverty is better pay for many professions and the improvement of women's opportunities in the labor market.
We will always fight for this in Berlin.
In Dortmund, it is about creating opportunities in which family and work can be reconciled.
This also includes providing suitable and flexible offers, making training and further education possible with childcare and converting more part-time jobs into full-time jobs.
Violence has no place in Dortmund.
Although crime is becoming less frequent, conflicts are leading to violence more quickly.
The police in Dortmund are doing a very good and successful job.
Taking care of the victims is our social responsibility.
We want to expand the free, anonymous and low-threshold counselling centres and shelters.
For Dortmund schools, we want to develop our own programme that teaches how to resolve conflicts without violence, as well as setting up a contact point for bullying for teachers and students that can be found both on the internet and on the school grounds.
Dortmund remains diverse.
Everyone who comes to Dortmund and wants to live here permanently or just for a short time is welcome, regardless of their social and cultural background.
Dortmund has always been characterised by immigration and many of our buildings and much of Dortmund's economic success is due to our new and old neighbours.
For us Social Democrats, it has long been clear that integration is not a one-way street and that Dortmund is definitely a winner when it This is how our city was created and this is how our city is created and transformed every day.
The Ruhr area, but especially our city, has always been a colourful mix of long-established, new and only short-term Dortmund residents, which is why a culture of welcome is already a reality for us today.
We are grateful for this and will do everything we can to maintain and expand it.
All people in Dortmund should be guaranteed the same chance of a career in education that corresponds to their individual abilities and achievements.
Social criteria should not play a role in the course of education.
We must take on the issue of loneliness much more strongly.
Loneliness is an often suppressed issue that has been accepted in silence for far too long, especially in the older generation.
We will establish the first staff unit in Germany to combat loneliness, which will develop new models for Dortmund to tackle this problem.
No one should be lonely in Dortmund – this is our goal, because behind this are real stories.
Turning neighbourhood libraries into citizens' schools of the future will make children our future.
Therefore, we can never accept that children grow up in poverty.
They should no longer ask why something is not possible, but only when it is possible.
The places for them and their families should become our district libraries, which we want to expand - or rebuild - in every district.
They should become the new advice center and first point of contact for families and the places that children can conquer.
If you ask where they can learn, take their first steps in digitalization, then this should take place here.
But not only children should be helped - overburdened parents should also be offered a point of contact there.
The concept of kindergartens as family centers offers another good starting point to better support and advise families.
Here we also want to start and expand these centers and better equip them.
Especially the local and personal approach to parents and children offers a good opportunity for them to experience interesting events and educational offers for their children and personal advice and support in a familiar environment.
The previous funding of the state is in no way sufficient for this.
Dortmund takes care – that is in our DNA!
Best education We have invested massively in the care of children and the modernisation of our schools in recent years.
In a growing city, it is a matter of course that this must continue at a high pace.
In the next decade, it will not only be about expansion, but also about quality, and investment must be made quickly and well.
Our goal is to enable every child and young person to receive the best possible support and education.
Educational paths will remain open through longer joint learning.
We will realise this path through the expansion and founding of comprehensive schools according to the wishes of parents.
We will continue to expand the support of primary schools and secondary schools and the teachers working there in the process of inclusion through counselling centres.
All schools will receive fast internet connections and a high-performance WLAN.
Access to digital information is made possible for all learners in all schools.
Schools are supported in the planning of learning processes with digital media.
The schools are equipped with the appropriate hardware and the support and service for the networks and devices are ensured.
In the Dortmund cityscape, there is a social inequality that goes against our claim to equal opportunities in education.
It is also part of our responsibility to set priorities and to treat the unequal things unequally.
Especially day care centers and schools in neighborhoods with poor structural prerequisites must be better equipped in terms of personnel and finances.
That is why we will establish a municipal social index with the possibilities available to us.
However, this does not exclude the other.
Good personnel, a broad range of play and care options and freedom of choice in care times must become Dortmund’s trademark throughout the city.
This also means that the open comprehensive school day in Dortmund is not only available for all, but becomes a true educational comprehensive school day.
Where the state government is not acting, we will act, for example in the areas of school social work, inclusion, free and healthy meals and free public transport for all students.
Children and young people have rights and they should demand these loudly.
Student representatives are the first point of contact for the interests of the students in our city.
We want to involve them more in the political bodies through a constant dialogue with the city.
The same applies to the youth and trainee representatives.
In addition, we will establish a city-wide Dortmund youth parliament, which will receive its own budget every year.
This will allow it to spend money on projects of its own choosing – and incidentally, the senior citizens’ council should always receive funds in the same amount, which would not only be a premiere, but also connect generations.
At the same time, we will financially support the district councils, which already have a good exchange with the district students in this area.
In addition, we will also establish contemporary participation structures in the sense of a participatory youth policy.
The aim is to enable children and young people to participate actively in processes and decisions along their diverse life realities.
The establishment of their own them Dortmund Children's Summer In the summer, the city belongs to families, young people and children.
We want to bundle all the offers for children in the city in a large, free program and expand it for every summer holiday.
New highlights will be, for example, a city Olympics as the finale of the summer games in the districts, a children's music festival and the first Dortmund Youth Film Days.
Our parents should not have to worry about childcare during the summer holidays.
And our children should be able to enjoy the holidays.
Sport City No.
1 - also locally In addition to living, education and mobility, we will make the modernization and maintenance of our sports facilities the fourth major focus of our investments.
Exercise and sport are still the best means for health.
We have presented a plan to bring all sports facilities in Dortmund up to date.
Now it is a matter of implementing it.
Happy retirement Health and mobility in old age is a valuable asset.
We want to offer children under 14 and people over 60 free access to swimming pools, so that they can swim at least once a week.
In addition, at least one of the city's parks should have a senior fitness trail with age-appropriate equipment.
Ensuring care everywhere We have reorganised the city's clinic despite the chronic failure of the state's investment funding and the perverse incentives of the fee-for-service system, and we are continuously modernising its facilities.
We stand for a long-term commitment by the city as the owner.
At the same time, we need to hold cooperation talks with all hospitals in Dortmund to prevent unnecessary competition and blockades.
The spatial, material and personnel equipment of the city's care facilities must be significantly increased so that they can become a modern and future-oriented employer and meet the personnel challenges of the care landscape.
By expanding doctor centres and care cooperatives in the neighbourhoods, we want to further expand the quality of care close to home.
We also want to make greater It is important that children are well cared for, regardless of their parents' financial situation.
That is why we want to strengthen the networks between parents, schools, the city and paediatricians in the districts.
We want to promote healthy nutrition and exercise through good advice and information, but the local offers must also be accessible to everyone.
We want to expand this significantly.
The children's health goal adopted by the city council is to be implemented by the health department, together with the many committed providers (kindergartens, schools) and other partners, through specific programmes.
The Dortmund consensus in a large Dortmund conference must be revived again It was the Dortmund consensus that made the successful change possible.
When business, churches, social associations, the city, science and others come together regularly, a lot can be achieved.
This consensus can be seen and found again and again in the city.
We want to revive this spirit again and again, especially in these turbulent times.
That is why we want a large Dortmund conference, at which the major guidelines are developed by consensus.
Associations need more weight.
Volunteering has a long tradition in Dortmund.
There are many contacts and a good exchange.
However, we want to be listened to even better.
The work of the associations with each other and with the local authorities should be better coordinated through central contact points in the new neighbourhood centres.
We also want to establish an advisory board of associations in order to be able to take up and implement their concerns more quickly.
Citizen participation With nordwärts, we have tried out many new methods of listening to various topics in the first five years.
In the second half of the decade project until 2025, we want to roll out the most successful models and move on to doing better.
The implementation of the “Dortmund app” will also be central, where citizens can easily and quickly inform themselves about developments on site and their opportunities for digital and analogue participation.
We will also initiate projects for citizen participation after the end of the nordwärts project.
SPD on site We do not want to be left out when it comes to listening.
We are not for nothing the party of the caretakers.
Our office holders and elected representatives will be regularly approachable on site in citizen consultation hours.
For good ideas, we want to additionally build a “KümmertEuch platform” for Dortmund on the Internet.
Our neighborhood campaign is running successfully and it is our goal to start it throughout the entire city.
Excellent at the top and strong in the middle For us, every person has the right to culture.
We see the task of the city here to create spaces and opportunities where culture and people can develop.
Culture from Dortmund should stand for something new and exciting.
The path we have taken with the Academy for Digitality and Theater, we want to continue with all six disciplines and create more new places of the future.
There should be more cultural offers on site and cultural creators should receive more opportunities in the city.
That is why we will increase the funds for the free scene.
Culture is a big part of Dortmund.
Culture can be fun, and that includes the BVB fan culture, Schlager, E-Sports and many other areas.
We want these to find a permanent and colourful home on the new Strobelallee fan mile.
Culture can also be education.
Just as education should not be a privilege for the few, we believe that everyone has the right to access culture.
Therefore, we believe that it is the city's task to create more opportunities for everyone.
That is why we want to expand the range of offers for all age groups.
Children and young people in particular need open access to culture.
That is why we want to continue to open up the children's and youth theatre and strengthen it with a new building.
Dortmund is experiencing and reviving its nightlife.
In the past, Dortmund's nightlife was more diverse.
Nightlife in Dortmund must once again be a real and new experience.
We want to strengthen the scene districts and the bar and club culture through a "night mayor", who mediates, enables and gives the scene a face.
The range of gastronomic offerings can also be broader and better.
We want to specifically promote individual gastronomic concepts in certain zones in order to build recognisable entertainment districts.
Diversity and breadth of offerings should be what Dortmund is all about.
Relaxed and fun The Christmas market is a long-standing tradition in Dortmund.
Kirmes and district festivals, often developed and maintained by volunteers, are real places of good neighbourhood and meeting points for the districts.
The tradition is firmly anchored here and is maintained.
Dortmund Òle, Pokémon Go, Juicy Beats, Festi Ramazan and Comic-Con have shown that there is more to come and that Dortmund is always open to new ideas.
Good events in a city can be the icing on the cake – but it is all about quality and quantity.
With a new event company, we want to not only manage new and old events better, but also involve the local people in shaping them.
In addition, we want to find a location for a new forest and outdoor stage to open up new possibilities.
Everyone gives what they can We want to test new payment models for the city's leisure and cultural offerings.
Instead of paying at the entrance, everyone should pay as much as they want or can at the exit.
We want to start with a park and a larger exhibition.
Investing is now the order of the day In this decade, we have managed to turn the city's budget into a positive one.
We did not need any help from Düsseldorf to achieve this, but were able to determine our own fate.
Now we are entering a new decade.
It is now about investing boldly and building up new substance again.
The priorities are clear and have been described: children, mobility, innovation and infrastructure.
The SPD in Dortmund is fighting for the abolition of the Municipal Tax Act (KAG).
Full-range providers will remain in Dortmund.
We have never gone along with the privatisation wave of others and have been insulted for years because of it.
Today it is clear that we were right.
But that is not enough for us.
Public services must always be accessible to everyone and must meet the highest standards.
This is the embodiment of solidarity.
We will introduce social tariffs where they are necessary.
Anyone who saves here will reap the consequences.
At the same time, we always want to ensure that the city's daughters remain competitive and can constantly develop.
Not for its own sake, but because they are service providers for the people in this city.
A strong and service-oriented city through more staff Digitalisation makes a lot possible.
It also helps us to improve the services of the city administration.
To this end, we will intensify the city's digitalisation efforts in the coming years in order to improve the range of services for citizens.
By 2030, we will have digitalised all municipal services so that, in particular, matters of citizens' services can be easily and quickly dealt with from home.
Our goal is to become Germany's most digital city administration.
But at the end of the day, it is always a person who does their job for the people of this city.
So where people are missing, for example in citizens' services, the public order office and the building administration, we must also train and employ more people there.
There is no way around this, because quality does not come for free.
Sticking to the course - sound finances We will continue to ensure that Dortmund has a good budget.
We will continue to make our voices heard in Düsseldorf and Berlin on many issues, whether it be social spending or regulations for old debts.
We want to keep the tax burden in the city stable.
This applies to business taxes as well as to property taxes.
We will be paying particularly close attention to the property tax reform.
It must not lead to the sudden disappearance of millions due to tax tricks or to people being unfairly burdened more.
We will continue to campaign for a land value tax in Berlin in order to put a stop to speculation here.
zentrale.ubdortmund@spd.de www.spd-dortmund.de