The Free Democrats in Dortmund stand and fight for the values of liberal democracy - also in local politics.
Individual freedom is the core of our actions.
We stand for an open, tolerant society in which different identities and lifestyles are welcome.
A liberal society is based on a strong state governed by the rule of law.
Liberalism works.
Because we trust people more – and prescribe less.
That is what we are fighting for.
Together.
For everyone.
For you.
Now.
Part 1 A change in the economy in Dortmund.
The aim is to streamline and speed up procedures by removing bureaucratic hurdles and increasing the digitalisation of processes.
Applicants must be seen as customers.
Offices must respond to inquiries by email within a pre-determined time.
The telephone and personal accessibility of all administrative units must be ensured.
The “deadlock” of individual offices when overloaded must come to an end.
Dortmund has transformed from a region primarily characterized by the steel and coal industry into a modern, diverse business location.
Dortmund is a major high-tech and knowledge location in Germany.
The relocation of the company headquarters of ELMOS is a warning sign.
Even within Dortmund, knowledge of the performance capabilities of local high- tech companies is low.
Dortmund's companies - especially the small and medium-sized enterprises - must also be supported as best as possible by the city.
Twinning and international project partnerships should be used more for global economic development, but also for a critical human rights dialogue.
The international measures in economic development and the new twinning initiated by the FDP with a budget proposal are a start and must be developed further.
The Free Democrats rely on qualification and the better compatibility of family and work, on This means for us: 1.
A culture of welcome for foreign skilled workers.
2.
Culture, technology and tolerance - these are important standard factors to attract skilled workers from outside.
3.
An effective image campaign must follow, which makes people outside our city want to work and study in Dortmund.
The Free Democrats in Dortmund do not want to go to the maximum of the debt permitted by the state.
We want the younger generations to still be able to make free political decisions about the design of our city.
The squandering of tax money for leftist pet projects must come to an end.
The municipal workforce continues to be inflated, by about 20 percent in the last five years alone.
We demand that the city may not create any new positions in the next few years.
Clear priorities are needed in the administration.
Funding programmes from the Federal Government and the State should only be used for non-investment expenditure.
The Freien Demokraten reject an increase in municipal taxes such as the Gewerbesteuer and Grundsteuer for the coming election period.
They also advocate for the abolition of the Hundesteuer, the Beherbergungsabgabe on hotel overnight stays and the Vergnügungssteuer on the provision of sexual acts.
The annual deficit of the Dortmund clinic of currently 35 million euros threatens the existence of the largest hospital in our city.
The municipal clinic needs far-reaching structural reforms.
We want to sell pure financial investments such as RWE in order to finance investments in infrastructure and to reduce the city's debts.
Unfair competition must not be allowed to be made against the trades.
Digitalisation must be designed without media breaks, says the mayor.
The wheel does not need to be reinvented in every city, he adds.
Citizen-friendly communication and timely appointment scheduling are an ongoing task, he says.
Work is also unequally distributed in the city administration.
The Free Democrats stand for a capable legal system that protects the freedom of every individual and ensures order through fair rules.
We want rules to apply to everyone and to be enforced against illegal migration, tax fraud, social security fraud, aggressive selling and camping.
The law-abiding citizens must not be the dummies because others ignore the rules.
Violent crime is increasing again, especially at hotspots such as Dortmund Central Station.
Video surveillance is only justified if an unavoidable intervention is made possible.
Violence against young people also requires a clear and unambiguous response from the state.
Security in Dortmund also includes an effective rescue service and fire protection.
We are committed to a well-staffed and modernly equipped municipal order service.
The ban on storage and aggressive dealing must be consistently enforced.
In return, sufficient low-threshold overnight accommodation, washing and toilet facilities must be offered for the homeless.
The use of the Dortmund drug consumption room should again be restricted to Dortmunders.
The daily intensive cleaning in the city centre must continue.
The Free Democrats stand for the individual right to asylum and for the international obligations to take in people who are fleeing war and civil war.
We are resolutely against the abuse of the refugee status in order to immigrate into the social system.
Anyone who has no right to be in Germany must also be deported quickly and consistently.
The payment card prevents the payment of smugglers with cash and the transfer of social benefits abroad.
We Freie Demokraten want education opportunities not to depend on where someone comes from, but where the person wants to go.
Everywhere there are hidden talents that deserve good support.
EU citizens who migrate in order to receive social benefits have no right to reside in Germany.
All municipal projects that still promote such immigration into the social systems must be ended.
We want to consistently drive forward the construction, renovation and modernisation of school buildings.
This explicitly includes the strengthening of grammar schools and the preservation of special needs schools.
Intact and clean toilets must finally become the standard in schools.
We want digital janitors for the schools.
Dortmund must finally take the requirements of the Children's Education Act seriously.
It is too difficult for free non-profit and private providers in Dortmund.
A good youth policy can only be one that engages in dialogue with young people.
The city should also invest in youth social work in the future.
The Free Democrats are committed to equal participation of women in boards and in middle management of municipal companies.
We need to think holistically in the city administration and municipal companies, with all dimensions of diversity.
Our particular focus is on the vocational rehabilitation and inclusion of people with existing or threatened disabilities.
We reject any form of extremism that threatens the open society in Dortmund.
The urban coordination office should continue to be located in the office of the mayor.
The city of Dortmund offers a comprehensive range of social services through its administration or subsidized projects, especially for disadvantaged people.
The principle of demand and support has proven to be effective for long-term unemployed people.
Sanction options should be exhausted within the framework of the guidelines of the Federal Constitutional Court if benefit recipients do not fulfil their obligations.
Contact points for people affected by domestic violence, women's advice centres and women's shelters deserve secure support from the city.
We Freie Demokraten want to make Dortmund even more livable.
Culture and creative industries are a key factor for the economy as a whole.
A lively city needs a strong pub scene, good gastronomy and alternative clubs.
The Dortmund museums need better marketing.
We Freie Demokraten stand for a city development policy that explicitly wants space for parties and clubs and thinks along with them.
Outdoor catering should be made possible wherever possible.
Restaurants and pubs should be given the opportunity to set up fixed patio installations on sidewalks in certain areas.
In urban development, Dortmund must focus on the use of former industrial sites that have been left vacant.
All building-hindering and building-increasing requirements of the city, such as the compulsory greening of roofs, must be abolished.
We are in favor of prioritizing the densification of existing areas for the creation of new living space.
We need special efforts for the city center to make the city the "living room of Dortmund".
More urban greening, aesthetic urban furnishings and arrangements for the summer are just as important as the renovation of the paving in the pedestrian zone.
Cost-increasing replanning by the city administration should no longer be accepted by the council.
The Stadtbahn expansion program should be discussed and adopted by the council shortly after the municipal elections.
The connection of the H-Bahn to the U42, which is currently in the planning stage, must be implemented in the next electoral period.
The public transport connection to the airport is not suitable for the whole city.
We demand the introduction of automatic passenger counting systems in all trams and buses.
This technology provides precise and consistent data on vehicle occupancy – without additional personnel costs.
We reject a nearly comprehensive 30 km/h speed limit in the city.
A speed limit must be limited to danger points.
30 km/h as a cheap solution for noise protection must not become the norm.
No parking spaces should be destroyed in total for the expansion of cycle paths.
Free parking for a maximum of three hours at weekends should be introduced.
Dortmund needs an independent pedestrian officer in the administration who is not identical to the cycling officer.
Maintenance must be given priority over new construction.
Intersections of cycle and pedestrian paths must be made safer for pedestrians.
All renewed traffic lights must be equipped with a timer.
The FDP trusts the citizens a little bit, and does not want to control them.
The Order Office should consistently punish the blocking of pedestrian paths by rental scooters.
We support the idea from other cities of putting the care of green spaces in the street into the hands of private gardening companies.
Citizens want to do something, they want to create something with