CDU candidates and candidates for the Council, the District Representations and the Office of Mayor are looking forward to shaping politics and developing our home in a sustainable way.
We want to implement a policy that brings noticeable improvements for the majority of society in dialogue with the community.
As a people's party, we have different population groups equally in view and place the majority and the middle of society at the centre of our actions.
We are committed to the development and design of our hometown with great passion.
Alexander Kalou: Dortmund has the potential to become one of the best cities in Europe.
We need a city centre that is inviting again, with lively squares, attractive shops and safe streets.
Together we can make Dortmund a city that not only masters challenges, but in which everyone can bring out the best in themselves – regardless of their background, life path or age.
"We were the drivers, initiators and conductors.
We took on leadership and responsibility, we got things moving, we changed topics and moderated processes successfully" "We have worked day in and day out to shape the future of Dortmund for the good of the city and its people" "Virtual citizen offices" have been created so that selected official procedures can be easily completed virtually and from home via video conference"
The city brand is now being managed from a single source in order to be well positioned in the competition between cities.
The city is more than just a place for trade and shopping.
The move of the Technical University into the Hansa Carré is just as important as the continuation of proven and innovative formats such as the Feierabendmarkt or cultural events in the Stadtgarten.
The careless treatment of the city has ended.
A coordination center for loneliness has been established to prevent loneliness in Dortmund.
Drug clinics that focus on the people affected by the negative side effects rather than on the addicts and dealers.
A housing programme that specifically provides housing for young families who are particularly hard hit by the housing market.
The project “newPark” in Dortmund, which is being implemented with the participation of the city of Dortmund, will be realized.
The development of the former HSP area must be driven forward and supported, as must the municipal acquisition of the remaining areas “Area 5” and “Kaiserstuhl” on the Weserbergland site.
We place a special value on the establishment of companies in the field of new technologies, spin-offs from universities and start-ups.
To this end, we want to: Provide free-standing areas and spaces for start-up.
Encourage students and students to start a business through counselling.
Simplify the registration of businesses by bundling responsibilities.
A strong economy needs qualified workers – from executives to employees entrusted with simple tasks.
Dortmund must be an attractive place to work.
Targeted immigration also offers significant opportunities.
Unemployment is not only a personal tragedy, but also a loss of valuable workforce for society.
Our focus is therefore on combating unemployment.
Dortmund has 7 universities, 19 other research institutions as well as the Technology Centre Dortmund.
Dortmund is therefore one of the largest university and science locations in Germany.
Our demands and goals for this area are: Programmes from the Master Plan for Science 2.0 should be implemented.
Stronger networking between the city and universities (for example through cooperative projects and regular exchange between the administration and existing research institutions).
Special support for the founding of companies by young academics.
Housing construction programme specifically for young families.
Aim to create 2,500 suitable residential units during election period.
Establish a municipal real estate fund that invests in affordable housing as an investment form.
Streamline approval process and make greater use of legal provisions and discretionary powers.
Operate a land reserve policy to ensure that housing construction is also possible in the future.
We want to offer the possibility of realizing the dream of owning your own four walls by providing suitable plots of land.
We want to introduce rent-to-own models in municipal housing companies.
The availability of living space does not end at the front door.
The environment plays a significant role in whether people perceive their living space as livable.
CDU: We need a healthy environment, a city adapted to the consequences of climate change, a healthy economy, as well as sustainable and viable social structures.
We want to promote and support municipal support programs for: energy-efficient renovation of houses and the renovation of house facades and green roofs.
For autonomous energy supply in residential areas, for example through photovoltaics, block heating stations and heat pumps.
Dortmund residents are calling on the city to make a contribution to environmental protection and climate change adaptation.
Residents want to use geothermal energy more intensively and set aside areas for photovoltaics.
They also want to increase the allotment gardening through cooperation between the city and associations.
The long-term increase in cars per inhabitant has long led to conflicts in the limited road space.
Decades of neglect of infrastructure investments can be seen on Dortmund's streets.
Mobility is changing - even in Dortmund.
Every form of mobility is dependent on intact and safe infrastructure.
Improvements are necessary in all areas of transportation, cycle paths, sidewalks, public transport, as well as in the technical area for more efficient land use.
We are firmly opposed to a 30 km/h speed limit on all inner-city roads.
The installation of noise-reducing asphalt can be just as much a required alternative to the establishment of a 30km speed limit as speed limit 40.
Bike & Ride facilities should be built at public transport stops.
Public transport should be further developed in a more sustainable way and adapted to demand.
Use of smaller vehicles on less popular routes and at off-peak times; on-dem.
Create the framework conditions for the ability to work as a bus and tram driver as a part-time job to attract staff.
Realise the already agreed cycle routes in the whole city as soon as possible and create a digital map.
The CDU stands like no other party for security, order and cleanliness.
Our demands and goals for environmentally friendly mobility are: Encourage the use of public transport by introducing tickets at special prices, for example 1€ for certain days and events.
Strengthen the municipal order service is central to ensuring security and order.
For a safe and clean Dortmund, we want to achieve the following for Dortmund:
Dortmund wants to combat ordinary drug consumption through controls and sanctions.
Drug trafficking and consumption have increased very strongly in the common cityscape in recent years.
This is accompanied by accompanying criminality and other undesirable behavior, such as theft and aggressive behavior.
If the result of the audit is positive, the introduction of a municipal dog estate for the municipal order service.
Improve cooperation between the order service and the police.
Vulnerable groups, such as women, children and young people, and the elderly, must be strengthened.
Measures must be taken to protect them so that they can live as untroubled and free of fear as possible.
Citizens' participation in the police department is in order.
The citizens know best where security and order can be improved in our city.
The CDU has declared war on illegal dumping.
We want to meet the needs of people through forward-looking urban planning and the design of public spaces.
Floods, fires and other natural disasters repeatedly show us how important it is to haveforward-looking disaster protection.
The city must be well prepared to prevent disasters if possible.
In a solidary and social society, support and help is provided to those who need it.
Our policy is based on Christian social teaching.
It is important to prevent Dortmund from becoming a magnet for people with major problems.
No one should freeze on the streets of Dortmund.
Social inequalities are still passed on from generation to generation.
People are dependent on each other for a successful coexistence.
In all municipalities, spaces must be preserved and, if necessary, created, in which people can meet.
Where traditional institutions are breaking down or churches and associations are no longer able to reach parts of society, public forums, meeting points and community centres can provide an alternative and, not least, counteract loneliness.
Without voluntary work, society cannot function.
The many offers of sports clubs, music schools, the theatre and concert hall must also be seen as programmes for the social cohesion of the city.
The German government wants to strengthen civic engagement and voluntary work.
Naturalisation applications with good integration performance should be processed quickly.
Offers for value and cultural education for children and young people with a migration background should be made.
The cultural identity of the home country should be kept in mind and supplemented, not replaced.
School is the most important place of education where all children and young people spend many hours of their time over many years in this city.
Education is the central key for the social and individual development opportunities.
The multi-level school system enables both majority learning in the comprehensive school as well as learning differentiated according to performance in main and secondary schools.
All these schools are united by the need for sufficient, intact and functional school space.
All people who work and learn there, parents who contribute to the school community, make the school unique.
Our demands and goals for this are: Develop a sustainable digitalization strategy to meet current learning needs with and through digital media.
Promote special school programs, for example the NRW sports school (Goethe Gymnasium) and a cultural school.
Organization and administration of schools must be improved.
Out-of-school education and adult education should be promoted.
Children and young people have different needs than adults, and yet it is primarily adults who must work to realize them.
People of all age groups ask for offers that are tailored to their needs.
These offers should be designed to meet the needs of as many people as possible and should be interwoven with each other.
Develop more Kitas and primary schools into family centres.
Establish model Kitas with, for example, childcare times adapted to shift work and evaluate demand.
Promote healthy nutrition in Kitas, both in the local canteens and through counselling services for parents.
Support programmes that provide information on the dangers of political and religious extremism.
Everyone has the fundamental right to participate in public affairs, political participation and the opportunity to pursue their own interests in suitable places of residence.
Dortmund as the capital of culture and leisure in the Ruhr area.
A broad range of cultural and leisure offers is available for all people in the city and, ideally, a magnet for people from the entire region.
A “family card” must be introduced, with which families receive discounted admission to urban facilities such as the zoo or swimming pools.
There are strongly publicly funded shares (for example Drama, opera, concert halls) and a free cultural scene, which is partly supported by municipal subsidies.
In general, leisure activities can be designed and structured, but even nature is a popular leisure space.
The BvB is the flagship for the sporting city of Dortmund.
Significantly more people are involved in broad-based sport.
Sport is a hobby on the one hand, on the other hand it has various social functions.
The task of the city is to create framework conditions in partnership with clubs and to provide spaces for the practice of sport.
Sport needs places where it can be practised.
Places that are sought out and designed for the special needs of the different types of sport.
Our specific demands and goals in this regard are: Develop a city-wide swimming pool concept so that swimming pools can be renovated or built in a way that meets the needs.
The ability to swim is a matter of survival.
The CDU Dortmund sees digitization as an opportunity to make the work of the city more efficient and better.
To achieve this, we have the following goals: Continue to digitalize administrative work.
Introduce electronic files in all administrative areas comprehensively.
Digitize old file archives, provided that they are of importance for current and futureadministrative work.
Use so-called “chatbots” and artificial intelligence to answer questions from citizens.
Dortmund wants to develop the city as a ‘smart city’ A comprehensive broadband expansion in the city is the key to a digital Dortmund.
Digital companies belong to the largest growth sector of the future.
The city administration is essential for the smooth functioning of the city of Dortmund.
It provides a wide range of services for citizens and shapes the city together with police.
The C DU Dortmund will work to ensure that the city administration is efficient, economical and remains a responsible employer.
To achieve this, we want to: Improve citizen friendliness Administration is not an end in itself.
It is there to improve the lives of people.
In our understanding, this can only be achieved by an administration that is close to the citizens.
City employees deserve to work under good working conditions and with modern equipment.
Real estate management should be designed to be cost-efficient.
The use of administrative buildings must be consistently oriented towards business standards.
Energy supply is of vital importance for citizens and businesses.
It must be secure and not a luxury and must increasingly be based on renewable energy sources (see chapter Pragmatic and effective environmental policy for Dortmund)
CDU Dortmund stands for a serious budget policy that balances the budget in the long term and reduces debt as much as possible.
New debts are socially unfair and higher taxes and fees are not acceptable for citizens.
A sound budget can therefore preserve the ability to act of the city of Dortmund.
The tax and fee burden is at an all-time high.
Further burdens are not acceptable for citizens in our eyes.
We want to: Avoid further burdens on citizens and companies.
Conduct a critical review of the use of fees before increasing them.
Use funding from the federal government, state and EU and demand cost reimbursement.
State action must be profitable – after all, it is the money of the citizens.
We want to limit personnel expenditures through better administrative structures and bureaucratic reduction.
To avoid multiple offers, municipal offer structures should be reviewed.
Restraint in the promotion of political activism.
Limit personnel expenditures and use municipal real estate in a profitable manner.
Unnecessary municipal properties should be sold or leased.
Dortmund is a city of permanent change, a city in which the future can be won.
With your vote for the CDU: Make Dortmund an even more livable city.
Support measures for more security and order in Dortmund.
Secure and create jobs.
Promote modern