Election program 3 of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the 4th municipal elections on September 13, 2020.
The crisis will have significant long-term consequences.
Entire industries have to expect massive economic damage and job losses for 2020.
Dortmund politics does a lot to support start-ups.
However, as soon as the start-up is established at some point, the bureaucracy often strikes with full force.
The city administration should manage less and enable more.
Liberal-minded local politics also understands itself as a service provider for companies that create and maintain jobs.
We support start-up centres, in which start-ups and young companies can rent office and business premises in a simplified manner and under the best possible conditions.
Dortmund has put a lot of effort into creating the structural change away from coal and steel, towards services and technology.
Now the next profound structural change is on the basis of artificial intelligence.
Election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -4- Global thinking in economic development.
Economic development must think globally, at least European in terms of location marketing.
Dortmund should also start a new offensive for town twinning in the 21st century.
A single tragedy is the marketing of Dortmund's museums.
The self-image and external image of Dortmund are still very different.
The dream of the 153 people who want to come here is combined with the needs of our country for qualified workers.
We need a culture of welcome for these people - especially in the municipal offices.
We want to offer Dortmund as a location for a model experiment of the state, to restructure social services in the sense of a citizen money.
Even many Dortmunders/Dortmunders do not know their museums.
This must become more professional.
It is not the clever ones who should profit, but rather the needy.
We actively stand up for self-determination in all situations of life.
For citizens' and human rights and against discrimination.
For democracy and the rule of law and against political or religious extremism.
For openness to the world and against nationalism.
Racism has no place in our city.
Right-wing extremism is currently the biggest threat to the open society in Dortmund.
We do not want to offer right-wing radicals any areas of refuge.
Non-believers, Muslims, Jews, Christians and members of other religions – they all belong to our city society and are to be treated equally by politics.
Tolerance is not a one-way street.
We will never accept anti-Semitism or homophobia being propagated under the guise of religion.
We welcome the activities of the city of Dortmund in the field of diversity management, i.e.
measures that value and promote diversity in the world of work.
A good start has been made, but we want to go further.
It must be actively and consistently worked on in both the city administration and large companies.
The city should also work together with the associations of the economy to inspire and support small and medium-sized enterprises in the promotion of diverse teams.
Youth policy must offer young people a space - physically and socially.
Existing contact points for young people require the support of the city of Dortmund in the future.
Self-determination of adults must also apply to the responsible use of drugs, provided that Criminal law is not a suitable means of protecting health.
We are against the criminalisation of cannabis users.
We want to suspend the 362 entertainment tax on dance events until 2022.
The curfew in Dortmund must be permanently abolished.
Culture and the creative economy are a location factor for the economy as a whole.
We want education opportunities not to depend on where someone comes from, but where someone wants to go.
Everywhere there are unknown talents that deserve good support.
The Freie Demokraten want to drive forward the digitalisation of education and use the funds from the digital package quickly and purposefully.
By the fourth grade, all children should be able to achieve the bronze swimming certificate.
ABC and W-Lan in schools should be a matter of course.
We want to equip all classrooms with digital presentation media in the next electoral period.
The overhead projector should be consigned to the museum!
Dortmund Free Democrats are running for office in the municipal elections on 13.09.2020.
The party is committed to the preservation of Dortmund's special schools.
The FDP is also committed to strengthening schools in locations with special challenges.
Only quality will do justice to the 469 female and male students with and without special educational needs, the FDP says.
The primary schools and their support services: finally, flexibility.
School social work is one of the most important means of school-based care.
We want all children and young people to have contact persons to whom they can turn with their concerns and questions.
Vocational colleges are an important location factor for the economy.
School development planning should take into account long-term demographic and urban planning changes.
We Freie Demokraten support the vocational colleges in their important task.
A master is worth as much as a master.
The last two years of kindergarten are now free of charge on the initiative of the FDP family minister.
The FDP is committed to stronger cooperation between companies and schools, so that students can be eased into the world of work or vocational training at an early stage.
The challenge for the next term of the Council is to strengthen the small and medium-sized business structure in Dortmund with its competitive jobs.
The entertainment tax on dance events are to be abolished by 2022.
No new taxes and fees are to be introduced in the next electoral period.
Measures and projects from different departments with the same goal should be combined for cost control.
Unnecessary expenditure of money shortly before the end of the year can be avoided.
The tendency to enter into supposedly lucrative markets such as energy as a municipality is associated with high risks.
The Free Democrats are campaigning for the abolition of dog tax in Dortmund.
Digitalisation offers great opportunities for the administration of the city of Dortmund.
The party is fighting for the services to be outsourced by the city.
The Smart City approaches taken so far do not go far enough for us as Free Democrats.
The digital process must not be limited to transferring processes from the analogue approach to the digital world one to one.
The way to a digital future requires a change of mindset.
The Freie Demokraten in Dortmund would like to create a so-called citizen app for Dortmund.
This should be the central point of contact for people and institutions in the city when they want to get in touch with the administration.
The citizen app should offer the possibility of accessing all the services provided by the city, whether it is a live appointment with the citizens' services or contact with the Ordnungsamt.
The highest data protection standards must be adhered to and data security must be guaranteed.
Dortmund must be a safe place.
The fight against crime, especially organized or clan crime, can be supported by the city, especially by taking action against derelict properties.
The citizen app can serve as a smart solution to point the city to such fear -spaces.
We Freie Demokraten reject a comprehensive video surveillance.
We speak out in favor of continuing the intensive cooperation of all involved parties and the clear zero tolerance strategy.
The Free Democrats in Dortmund want to work towards preventing the illegal disposal of waste.
In cooperation with the EDG, there will be a free so-called bulky waste collection day for the whole of Dortmund.
The city needs more litter bins to combat waste.
Uncoordinated long-term construction sites are another ongoing annoyance for citizens.
The Dortmund Free Democrats are pleased about the increasing number of inhabitants.
However, this will mean that the demand for living space will continue to rise in the future.
We reject the nationalization of housing companies, because it does not create new living space at first.
We want to work to ensure that creative ideas are given the opportunity to come to fruition when creating living space.
We support the greening of roofs and facades and the use of roof spaces for the generation of renewable energy.
Even options for urban gardening should be examined.
We Freie Demokraten welcome the efforts of the city to further develop the area of the Dortmund harbor.
In general, the barrier-free living in our city must be developed further as a principle of urban planning, neighborhood by neighborhood.
The city of Dortmund should in future take on 60% of the costs itself, instead of passing them on to the citizens.
The election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020 -23- Extended and new lines in public transport.
We want to start a modern, digital version of the call-a-taxi service.
The plans of the DSW to concentrate digital offers on the inner city area, where there is already good public transport, go past the mobility requirements of young people.
The Free Democrats in Dortmund welcome the city's goal of becoming a "cycling city" in the future.
The expansion of the cycle network should be based on actual demand.
The current popularity of e-bikes requires an expansion of charging stations throughout the entire city.
Parking space management instead of parking displacement should be the priority for the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020.
The streets and pavements must be well maintained.
Parking fees in the suburban centers should be completely waived.
The city-center zones such as Kaiser and Saarlandstraße should retain their previous regulations.
Parking management should be introduced for the Park&Ride parking lots of the DSW.
The Dortmund municipal politicians must insist on the urgent expansion of the bottleneck Dortmund-Münster line in order to speed up traffic.
Election program of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020 -26- Intelligent traffic control systems.
Green right turn arrow (traffic sign 720 “Green arrow sign”) should be used more frequently.
Greening of bus and train stops should not impair traffic safety.
The financing should not be paid for by the taxpayer, but by private sponsoring initiatives.