Election program 3 of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the 4th municipal elections on September 13, 2020 The crisis will have significant long-term consequences.
19 Entire industries have to expect massive economic damage and job losses for 2020 - from trade fair and congress business to hotels, restaurants, catering and fairground operators at folk festivals to seminar providers and cultural businesses.
Other industries are affected by the loss of income of their customers due to short-time work and economic uncertainty - not least the retail trade and the craft industry.
The economic crisis is at the same time a social crisis, which particularly affects the self-employed, low earners and socially weak.
26 To bridge the most severe economic damage, the state government of CDU and FDP has provided immediate aid for solo self-employed and small businesses.
The NRW aid has gone far beyond the means of the federal government and has helped companies with between 11 and 50 employees.
30 Beyond the immediate aid, politics must work quickly on a new upswing, so that the crisis can be quickly overcome.
The instruments for this are above all the federal government and the state.
But the city of Dortmund can and must also make its contribution.
3 It is to be examined which investments can be brought forward from subsequent years.
All invitations to tender must be designed as locally friendly as possible, so that local companies can also benefit from them.
In order for companies to be able to offset the losses of this year at least partially through profits in the following years, the city of Dortmund should lower its trade tax rate for 2021 and 2022, provided that this does not conflict with the then applicable state law on the feasibility of the budget.
In the medium term, we are sticking to the goal of having the lowest possible trade tax.
The catering industry and hotels, as well as club operators and event organizers, are particularly affected by the closures and contact restrictions in the course of the corona pandemic.
In order to compensate for this, these businesses need relief for the time afterwards, so that they can make up for losses from the pandemic.
We therefore demand that the city of Dortmund waive special use fees for outdoor catering until 2022.
The accommodation tax (so-called "bed tax") should be waived until 2022 for private overnight stays in 53 Less bureaucracy, more entrepreneurship  55 Dortmund politics does a lot to support start-ups.
However, as soon as the start-up is established at some point, the bureaucracy often strikes with full force.
The city administration should manage less and enable more.
The administration's job is to ensure that rules are adhered to during the day.
However, a liberal-minded local politics also understands itself as a service provider for companies that create and maintain jobs.
We want to exploit all the scope for action in the interests of those who develop new things.
We want the administration not only to say what cannot be done, but to work together with the companies to find solutions on how it can be done.
And we want an administration that always has in mind that the costs for requirements and time delays must be earned - by the hard-working people in Dortmund.
65 Our city should become even more of a start-up city!
We support start-up centres, in which start-ups and young companies can rent office and business premises in a simplified manner and under the best possible conditions.
In particular, it is to be examined to what extent 68 vacant properties in the city centre can be reused.
69 Strong research and science  71 The economic power of the future depends  in particular  on research and science 72 as well as the creative exchange with the economy.
In addition, we want to keep the potential of skilled workers who study and research at the Dortmund universities more strongly in our city 74 and our region.
We Freie Demokraten see technological and economic change primarily as an opportunity for our city.
High Tech in different applications, IT and digital solutions - in many areas Dortmund is already strong.
Together with the FDP-led Innovation Ministry at state level, we want to further strengthen research and technology transfer.
79 Election programme of the Dortmund Freie Demokraten for the local elections on 13.09.2020 Digitalisation and artificial intelligence - the next structural change for Dortmund  81 Dortmund has put a lot of effort into creating the structural change away from coal and steel, towards services and technology.
Now the next profound structural change is on the At the same time, the nature of work and the content of work will change significantly in many sectors.
Municipal labor market policy must respond to this change proactively in dialogue with business and the trade unions.
The timely retraining and further training of people should be at the forefront of this.
We should also actively use the opportunities of digitalization for new climate-friendly and self-determined forms of work and for new business ideas that will shape the economy of tomorrow.
Right to work from home in the city administration.
In addition to a sufficient number of childcare places, we also need good quality early childhood education.
The new Children's Education Act has created very good conditions for this in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia with the liberal family minister: an additional 1.3 billion euros per year for childcare facilities, an additional contribution-free year of childcare and incentives for better quality.
These good conditions must now be implemented at the local level.
We rely on the variety of childcare offers - for example, with regard to pedagogical concepts and opening hours.
In each district we need a childcare facility that also offers services for parents working shifts.
And we must finally take the requirement of the Children's Education Act seriously in Dortmund, which provides for a variety of providers.
It is too difficult for free non-profit and private providers in Dortmund.
We are focusing in the council on parent initiatives, on free non-profit and private providers - also to enable more company childcare facilities.
120 Election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -4- Global thinking in economic development  124 Economic development must think globally, at least European in terms of location marketing.
We, the 125 Free Democrats, want to use town twinning more for economic development, but also for cooperation on climate protection.
It must be about agreeing on concrete cooperation projects with operational measurable goals.
Dortmund should also start a new offensive for town twinning in the 21st century.
The selection of our partner towns still follows the realities of the last century.
New partnerships must develop in line with our new economic structures.
We should look for new partners in high-tech and IT locations.
And we should recognise that Africa is not only our neighbouring continent, but that there are also growth markets of the future here.
Dortmund needs an African town twinning – also for economic reasons.
135 Better marketing of our city  137 Despite many image campaigns by the city, the self-image and external image of Dortmund are still very different – especially when it comes to the quality of life in terms of leisure, culture and living.
The impression is that the previous efforts were often perceived primarily in the city itself rather than by the target groups outside.
The definition of the target groups for such image campaigns is unclear, so that concrete successes are difficult to measure.
143 A single tragedy is the marketing of Dortmund's museums.
Instead of marketing them as a package from the football museum to the Baukunstarchiv and the DASA to the Industriemuseum Zeche Zollern as an attractive reason for Dortmund tourism, one has to search for information laboriously.
Even many Dortmunders/Dortmunders do not know their museums.
This must become more professional.
148 Use the opportunities of skilled worker immigration  150 With the new skilled worker immigration law, the immigration of skilled workers from non-EU countries is being made easier.
We welcome this explicitly.
The The dream of the 153 people who want to come here is combined with the needs of our country for qualified workers.
We need a culture of welcome for these people - especially in the municipal offices.
In addition, these immigrants also need support for social integration.
The municipal integration offers, which have been very strongly directed at refugees with low qualifications or poor German language skills, must be adjusted to these well-qualified immigrants and make new offers.
159 We want to simplify the start for foreign skilled workers by making English the second administrative language as quickly as possible.
To this end, we want to take appropriate initiatives at the state and federal level.
163 Limiting poverty immigration within the EU According to the EU Treaty 169, there is no right to reside in another EU country if there is no prospect of work or sufficient financial resources after six months.
If the conditions for residency are not met, the aliens authority should end the residency.
173 Demand and support as well as inclusion as central approaches of employment promotion 175 The principle of demand and support has proven to be correct in the case of long-term unemployed people.
It must be ensured that the job center has sufficient staff for the care.
177 We want to exhaust the sanction options within the framework of the guidelines of the Federal Constitutional Court if recipients of benefits do not fulfill their obligations.
For a very limited group of people, we want to convert unemployment benefits into grants for a socially insured activity if this cannot be otherwise placed in the first job market ("active-passive exchange").
182 In the qualification measures of the job center and the Federal Employment Agency, more quality must be maintained.
Contracts may not be awarded to the cheapest offers with poorly paid lecturers.
In addition, more individually We want to support this path of participation as much as possible on the part of the city and the job center.
189 Model experiment citizen money and more decision-making freedom for the city 191 We want to offer Dortmund as a location for a model experiment of the state, to restructure social services in the sense of a citizen money.
It is not the clever ones who should profit, but rather the needy.
This means combining various tax-financed social services and to lump them together.
At the same time, it means ensuring that those who earn their own additional income keep significantly more than today for those who work, for example, in part-time.
Because we also want to reward those who make an effort within the scope of their possibilities.
198 We would like the city of Dortmund to use all innovative possibilities that the social security books offer for its own municipal decisions.
As a first step, we are countering the state of North Rhine-Westphalia to allow the cities to lump together the costs of accommodation in Hartz IV.
We do not want case officers to decide what is an appropriate accommodation for Hartz IV recipients - they should decide 204 The Federation should also make it possible for more cities to take complete control of the care of long-term unemployed people (“Optionskommune”).
If this option is created again, we want to use it for Dortmund.
207 Election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -6- City of Diversity: Self-determined in all situations of life 210 The Free Democrats stand for a city of diversity, in which everyone can live their individual life paths and life dreams within the framework of the legal system.
We actively stand up for self-determination in all situations of life.
For citizens' and human rights and against discrimination.
For democracy and the rule of law and against political or religious extremism.
For openness to the world and against nationalism.
Racism has no place in our city.
217 Self-determination is also the guiding principle for us in a policy for the weaker members of our society.
We stand up for solidarity in our society.
Solidarity support  219 must not turn into patronizing.
Every municipal offer must be measured against whether it guarantees individual freedom of choice and the greatest possible freedom of action for individual citizens within the scope of their individual possibilities.
223 We Freie Demokraten want to promote creativity and culture in our city – especially when it emerges outside established institutions.
225 We want to strengthen democratic participation.
227 Transparency and clarification are the most important cornerstones for the formation of opinions and the freedom of decision of the people in our city – especially for us liberals.
That is why we demand a live broadcast of the public meetings of the council and the hearings of its committees on the internet.
This way, every citizen can follow how the interests are represented in the council (or not) at any time, conveniently and transparently.
232 We Freie Demokraten in Dortmund strive to develop a concept for the establishment of a youth parliament by the city of Dortmund in the next legislative period.
We believe that such a youth parliament can be a useful instrument for participation for young people, which is why we 240 Right-wing extremism is currently the biggest threat to the open society in Dortmund.
241 We welcome the measures that have been initiated by the city.
We do not want to offer right-wing radicals any areas of refuge.
The prosecution of criminal offences and unconstitutional activities and prevention – especially in the area of young people – must go hand in hand.
In addition to the current priority of combating right-wing extremism, we must not be blind to left-wing extremist perpetrators and religious fanatics who threaten our freedom.
Preventative activities must address all forms of political extremism.
248 Election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -7- Tolerance towards different religions and values 252 Dortmund was and is a tolerant city.
This also includes tolerance towards different religions and values.
Non-believers, Muslims, Jews, Christians and members of other religions – they all belong to our city society and are to be treated equally by politics.
Tolerance is not a one-way street.
If someone demands religious tolerance, they cannot discriminate against others because of their sexual orientation or their clothing with religious justifications.
We will never accept women being attacked because of their headscarf or because of their supposedly too revealing clothing.
We will never accept anti-Semitism or homophobia being propagated under the guise of religion.
Our local politics are based on the republican values of our constitution.
We support interreligious dialogue in Dortmund, secure religious freedom even when building places of worship and at the same time protect the free lives of believers and non-believers from religiously motivated discrimination.
273 Diversity and equal opportunities in the world of work  275 We, the Free Democrats, stand for equal opportunities – regardless of gender, origin and skin colour, regardless of sexual orientation and identity, regardless of age and religion, with and without disabilities.
We welcome the activities of the city of Dortmund in the field of diversity management, i.e.
measures that value and promote diversity in the world of work.
A good start has been made, but we want to go further.
It must be actively and consistently worked on in both the city administration and large companies.
The city should also work together with the associations of the economy to inspire and support small and medium-sized enterprises in the promotion of diverse teams in personnel development.
This is not only in the interests of groups that have been discriminated against in the past.
It is in the interests of everyone, because diverse, discrimination-free companies are often more creative and bring the economy as a whole forward.
286 In addition, active senior citizens in retirement age – whether as employees and self-employed or as active volunteers – should also be taken into account in the field of divers A basic prerequisite for this is to work on this in kindergartens, schools and youth work.
Within the scope of the possibilities of the commune, we want to break down role stereotypes, develop diverse talents regardless of gender and also promote internships for students regardless of common role models.
Girls and women from immigrant families require special attention.
They should have trusted persons in schools and day care facilities that they can turn to.
For equal participation regardless of gender, a good compatibility of family and work is a basic prerequisite.
In addition to good childcare and home office options, social acceptance must also be strengthened that men take on the main part of parental leave or work part-time.
We want to promote this acceptance especially in the city administration and municipal companies through a holistic diversity management.
In addition, the city of Dortmund must lead by example when it comes to women in management positions and supervisory boards of municipal companies and their participations.
There is considerable catching up to do here.
Therefore, we want to appoint women to these positions as a priority when they have the same qualifications, performance and experience.
We support flexible targets here and in the middle management of the 309, but no fixed quotas.
310 LSBTI policy in Dortmund 312 We are pleased that Dortmund has developed in recent years to be one of the most committed cities 313 when it comes to the lives of lesbians, gays, bisexuals, trans* and intersexual (LSBTI).
The liberal-led NRW Ministry of Families and the city of Dortmund provide long-term support for important projects of the LSBTI community.
We want to continue this.
The SCHLAU school education project and the Sunrise youth centre do outstanding work to reduce prejudices and support the coming out of young people.
The health project “pudelwohl”, which is aimed at bisexual and homosexual men, is also an important facility.
We support the long-term financing of all these projects.
We want to strengthen the commitment to rainbow families, LSBTI seniors and trans people, but also the LSBTI dimension for an effective diversity management in the workplace.
LSBTI policy must remain a leadership task.
That is why the 324 Youth policy and youth promotion in Dortmund 326 Dortmund has an active youth.
Young people should be encouraged to bring their ideas, wishes and fears and to help shape our city.
Good youth policy can only be that which enters into dialogue with young people.
Youth policy must, however, at the same time offer young people a space - physically and socially.
This includes creating opportunities for dialogue and continuing to make spaces available throughout the city for active youth groups and facilities.
322 Existing contact points for young people require the support of the city of Dortmund in the future.
These form an essential and necessary part of youth welfare in Dortmund.
In particular, access to addiction prevention, offers for mobile victims and low-threshold sexual advice, which addresses all forms of sexuality without prejudice, is of particular importance.
323 Election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -9- Self-determined use of cannabis 324 Self-determination of adults must also apply to the responsible use of drugs, provided that Criminal law is not a suitable means of protecting health.
We are against the criminalisation of cannabis users.
Therefore, we demand that a pilot project be initiated for Dortmund in order to research the effects of legal distribution of cannabis to adults.
Alcohol: Against the harassment of citizens.
We, the Dortmund Free Democrats, are against the "nanny state".
We do not see any need for temporary and localised bans on the consumption and sale of alcohol.
We believe that the goal and the means are not in a suitable balance.
Young party-goers or football fans do not need to be patronised when and if they decide to consume alcohol.
At the same time, people who cause disturbances or damage through the consumption of alcohol in public must be countered by the police and the creation of suitable places and alternative spaces.
Freedom for the clubs.
A lively city needs a lively club scene.
In the past, complaints from neighbours, noise protection and the conversion of gastronomy areas into shopping centres or office projects have dealt a severe blow to this liveliness.
We, the Free Democrats, stand for a city development policy To compensate for the loss of revenue due to Corona, we want to suspend the 362 entertainment tax on dance events until 2022.
And above all, we want people to be allowed to dance when they want.
The curfew in Dortmund must be permanently abolished.
363 Strengthen free culture.
Dortmund has great cultural offerings: from opera and ballet to theater and concert halls to the free cultural scene.
They contribute to making our city so livable and lovable.
Culture and the creative economy are a location factor for the economy as a whole.
We want to maintain the public cultural offerings at a high level and give the free culture a stronger weight at the same time.
It must be sustainably supported, especially during and after the Corona crisis.
In addition, we want to focus more on the cultures of newcomers - not only in the sense of folklore from the old homeland, but above all in the context of current forms of expression of our citizens with a migration background.
376 Election program of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.202 We, the 380 Freie Demokraten, want education opportunities not to depend on where someone comes from, but where someone wants to go.
Everywhere there are unknown talents that deserve good support.
The Corona crisis has shown one thing in the area of digitalisation: for years the city, as the school authority, has neglected to provide teachers and students with appropriate digital media.
We will work to ensure that the digital infrastructure of our schools in Dortmund is massively improved.
396 Investments in all schools: “Good School 2020” programme in Dortmund  398 The best education can only be achieved if the students are not, in the truest sense of the word, hit on the head with the roof.
We therefore want to consistently continue the renovation and modernisation of school buildings and thus create a modern learning environment.
Because only if it doesn’t rain inside the building and students can use clean toilets and well-maintained buildings, can they concentrate on learning.
Soap, towels and disinfectants should also be standard in every school, even outside of the Corona crisis.
405 School sport: more movement for young people  407 The best education also includes the best school sport.
Too many children cannot swim until the fourth grade.
By the fourth grade, all children should be able to achieve the bronze swimming certificate.
To achieve this, it is helpful that qualified auxiliary staff can now support swimming teachers, so that more swimming lessons can take place.
It is important that swimming times are not unnecessarily reduced by closing halls and transport routes being too long.
413 415 Sports halls are also to be made available to the open comprehensive school and clubs.
This makes broad-based sport possible throughout the area.
417 We Freie Demokraten support and promote school and amateur sport and 418 welcome the performance centres that already exist in many schools.
419 Election programme of the Dortmund Freie Demokraten for the local elections on 13 September 2020 -11- School and digitalisation: The end of the chalk era 421 ABC and W-Lan in schools should be a matter of course.
This is the prerequisite for education to succeed in the digital world.
The Freie Demokraten want to drive forward the digitalisation of education and use the funds from the digital package quickly and purposefully.
Further funding opportunities are also to be exploited in order to implement digitalisation in schools as quickly as possible.
426 We want to equip all classrooms with digital presentation media in the next electoral period.
The overhead projector should be consigned to the museum!
428 Many funds from the digital package of the black-yellow state government have already 431 All support programs to provide technical equipment to socially disadvantaged students in times of crisis or during longer illnesses, at least on loan, must be used in Dortmund.
432 Digital janitors: if the smartboard needs an update 436 We, the Free Democrats, want digital janitors for the schools.
The technical equipment needs a lot of maintenance and system care, which teachers cannot manage in addition to their other duties.
We need technically skilled specialists on site and at every school.
439 A central employee pool, which only needs to be called for, is not enough for this.
440 It would also be useful to build the entire technical equipment modularly and uniformly in order to standardize the technology.
442 Technology in the classroom that works 444 The most modern technology does not help anyone if it is not more practical than the old one.
For this, there is a need for further training for the teachers and help with integrating it into the curriculum.
The initiative of the state government “Logineo” is a possibility as a platform for secure data exchange.
The Corona crisis has shown that in Dort Because data security is also an important aspect in school 449, which should not be passed on to the teaching staff.
450 Talent schools: because talent is everywhere 452 The four talent schools for Dortmund 453 initiated by the FDP Minister of Education are a great opportunity to create real signals for the best education in the districts with the greatest social challenges.
We urge the city of Dortmund to support this concept intensively and to advocate for further Dortmund talent schools.
456 We are also committed to strengthening schools in locations with special challenges.
We welcome the fact that significantly more teaching positions are being distributed according to a social index and that there will be a school-specific social index in the future.
Because on the way to greater equality of opportunity, it is an important step that schools with special challenges also receive more support.
459 Election program of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020 -12- Special schools and inclusion: quality instead of speed 463 We are committed to the preservation of Dortmund's special schools.
For us, the equal coexistence Only quality will do justice to the 469 female and male students with and without special educational needs.
Schools need adequate staffing and structural resources to make inclusion a success.
Schools for joint learning rely on the expertise and experience of special education teachers.
We rely on qualified specialist staff for the integration team, who meet the needs of the children and the schools.
The city must follow up to ensure this qualification.
The primary schools and their support services: finally, flexibility.
In the context of the open all-day school (OGS), we rely on the freedom of choice of parents.
We therefore welcome the increased flexibility introduced by the current state government, which now allows parents to have their children exempted from the all-day care on a regular, fixed date or on the basis of special circumstances.
This leaves room for the interests of the children and decisions within the family.
We are also campaigning for the further expansion of all-day care places.
We want to strengthen cooperation with clubs within the framework of the all-day care, because this is where the foundations for the later interests of the children are laid.
487 School social work: Meeting challenges  489 School social work is one of the most important means of school-based care.
Whether individual case management in the most difficult cases or support in challenging classes, whether help in the classroom or accompaniment on school trips, school social work is the authority that always helps.
493 We Freie Demokraten are also committed to linking the youth promotion offers with school social work and the social worker positions at schools.
We want all children and young people to have contact persons to whom they can turn with their concerns and questions and who can help in conflict situations.
497 We welcome the fact that school social work can support parents and children in actually using the opportunities of the education and participation package.
In concrete terms, this means that through the advice and support of school social work, the financial support opportunities, for example, for the membership fee in a sports club or music school, should also be used.
502 We are also increasingly committed to the use of so-called integration guides, which are intended to break down language barriers, for example, at parents' evenings.
504 Election program of the Dort School development planning must be based on the demand of parents and 513 students.
In addition, school development planning should take into account long-term demographic and urban planning changes.
New construction projects also need plans for these issues.
A Jewish primary school: tradition and modernity The variety here means that there are particularly life-like and individual solutions for the school careers of all.
533 Vocational colleges are an important location factor for the economy.
The economically-oriented and at the same time individual focus of the RBZ helps this network to secure the economic future of Dortmund.
We Freie Demokraten support the vocational colleges in their important task.
A master is worth as much as a master.
537 Early childhood education.
539 Education starts with the very youngest.
They need a secure home and a secure environment, security and a secure start in language skills.
Secure mastery of the German language sets the foundation stones for success and life in Germany and here in Dortmund.
543 Here is where the kindergartens and other childcare options come in, so that every child has a fair chance to go their own successful way and to enable social advancement for all.
Diversity among providers is also pedagogical diversity.
For this reason, we are expanding early childhood education and are thus creating learning and play environments for our youngest children.
547 Election program of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020 -14- In order to create equal opportunities for all, the last two years of kindergarten are now free of charge on the initiative of the FDP family minister.
549 Cooperation between schools and businesses 550 The FDP is committed to stronger cooperation between companies and schools, so that students can be eased into the world of work or vocational training at an early stage.
In addition, we are committed to an unbureaucratic way that allows schools to involve personalities from the business world on a voluntary basis or on a temporary employment basis.
555 These cooperations should also be used more for communal project days, which schools should offer more individually.
557 Politics for Dortmund that can count 559 Positive external influences such as the good economic situation before the Corona crisis, as well as low inflation and interest rates have in recent years contributed significantly 571 The challenge for the next term of the Council is to strengthen the small and medium-sized business structure in Dortmund with its competitive jobs in the two years after the crisis, even if strict budget consolidation is not strictly adhered to.
As soon as the situation allows, the focus must be returned to the generation-appropriate consolidation of the budget.
576 In our view, a balanced budget must be achieved again in 2023.
Otherwise, we will burden future generations with new debts and reduce the future capacity for action of our city.
579 What is needed is a realistic, solid budget policy within the framework of a policy that can calculate.
It aims to achieve balanced budgets again after the crisis, as well as a reduction in short-term cash loans and long-term debts.
And even in the crisis, we want to set priorities and not distribute money with a watering can.
583 Reduce municipal tax burden in the crisis.
585 Municipal fees and charges influence the national location competition negatively and should be temporarily reduced to strengthen jobs after the Corona "bed tax") and the entertainment tax on dance events are to be abolished by 2022.
No new taxes and fees are to be introduced in the next electoral period.
593 The use of financial, technical and personnel resources of the city must be much more focused on efficiency than before.
Municipal or city-funded projects must be given clearly defined goals and guidelines with regard to their budget and their effectiveness, which must be reviewed regularly.
599 The Free Democrats demand a labelling obligation for all council proposals in order to distinguish between mandatory and voluntary tasks.
All voluntary expenditure must be put to the test.
Measures and projects from different departments with the same goal should be combined for cost control.
603 The city of Dortmund must try in each current budget year to permanently reduce costs and identify potential savings in as many departments as possible.
605 For a specific project, a budget can be saved for a period of up to two years, for example.
Unnecessary expenditure of money shortly before the end of the year can be avoided in order to not just use up the existing budget.
The share of short-term liquidity credits in municipal financing, which has been growing for years and conceals the full extent of the debt, must be continuously reduced by a binding percentage.
This reduces the risks for the budget in the event of an increase in interest rates.
These companies do not serve the communal public welfare.
Cities of comparable size such as Dresden or Düsseldorf have shown the way: Through divestment, new scope for investment in the future is created.
Suitable means are the gradual sale of the city's or municipal subsidiaries' shares, for example, the several hundred million euro heavy share package in RWE AG, as soon as the stock markets have stabilized again.
The tendency to enter into supposedly lucrative markets such as energy as a municipality is associated with high risks.
In private companies, the owners finance the risk with their assets.
In the commune, the taxpayer must take it on.
Therefore, the economic activity of the city should be closely limited.
The number of areas and buildings that the city manages should be reduced.
Real estate that is no longer needed will be sold.
639 Staffing of management positions in municipal subsidiaries.
641 Highly paid management positions of municipal politicians in municipal companies 642 damage the reputation of municipal politics and municipal companies.
The comparison with companies in the private sector is misleading, since the appointments are often political and 644 not based on proven management performance.
The remuneration and pension arrangements should therefore not exceed the remuneration of the mayor, at least in the next ten years, provided that managing directors and board members are transferred directly from municipal politics to the respective positions.
648 Abolish dog tax.
650 The Free Democrats are campaigning for the abolition of dog tax in Dortmund.
651 These taxes burden the affected citizens unnecessarily and are accompanied by high administrative expenditure.
653 Alternatively, greater emphasis should be placed on higher fines for offences, such as not removing dog mess.
655 Service, security, cleanliness – for an effective and citizen-friendly public service in Dortmund.
658 Our guiding principle Uncoordinated long-term construction sites, for example, must come to an end.
And we have seen during the Corona crisis where the city administration needs to be strengthened.
668 Digitalisation of the administration The digitalisation offers great opportunities for the administration of the city of Dortmund.
The first steps at the Personnel and Organisation Office are a good start for us, the Free Democrats, but they are by far not sufficient.
Especially with regard to the digital infrastructure of the city, we are fighting for the services to be outsourced by the city.
672 The election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -17- Applications for permits – except in cases where the law requires written form – in the future we want to make it possible to apply for permits digitally to the greatest possible extent.
674 Smart City 676 The Smart City approaches taken so far do not go far enough for us as Free Democrats.
The digital process must not be limited to transferring processes from the analogue approach to the digital world one to one.
The way to a digital future This requires a real change of mindset (so-called change management), i.e.
the modernisation of existing administrative processes with the aim of reducing bureaucracy and making it more citizen-friendly with the help of modern technology.
In order to make Smart City approaches a reality in Dortmund, the Freie Demokraten are calling for the extensive provision of data collected by the local authorities as part of an Open Data project.
The highest data protection standards must be adhered to and data security must be guaranteed.
Citizen app 690 We, the Freie Demokraten in Dortmund, would like to create a so-called citizen app for Dortmund.
This should be the central point of contact for people and institutions in the city when they want to get in touch with the administration.
The citizen app should offer the possibility of accessing all the services provided by the city, whether it is a live appointment with the citizens' services, contact with the Ordnungsamt or information from the Stadtentwässerung about current canal construction work and its duration.
The citizen app should bundle all the municipal services and make them easily accessible.
The offer of this app should also be available without installation on 699 Recruitment of staff  701 Many things in the administration of the city of Dortmund do not work because there is a lack of staff.
702 This city has a major recruitment problem in some areas of the administration.
703 In order for the administration to remain capable of performing in the medium and long term, we Freie Demo- 704 karten speak out in favour of a systematic recruitment concept.
This concept should, among other things, deal with the possibility of scholarships in the field of engineering, in order to bind graduates of technical courses to the city of Dortmund at an early stage.
708 Better use of staff in the administration  710 In recent years, we believe that waiting times for appointments at the citizens' services have become too long.
For peak times, when there is a large influx of people at the citizens' services, whether in the Berswordthalle or in the districts, we are in favour of the city providing so-called "springers" within the framework of its staffing plan.
These are to be employees who ensure a balance in certain areas that are sensitive to citizens in peak times or in This is 718 an approach for us to make citizen services more citizen-friendly.
719 Public health service  721 The public health service has led a shadowy existence in terms of political attention and staffing in recent years.
The Corona crisis has shown us its true importance.
We therefore want to evaluate the tasks, tasks and workflows, staffing and recruitment, equipment and digitization of the health department after the end of the acute measures in the Corona crisis in order to strengthen the public health service.
727 Health and social services  729 The committed work of doctors, nurses and care workers in the Corona crisis has earned our greatest appreciation.
We are pleased that self-administration in the health sector works well in Dortmund.
The many general practitioners, general practitioners' association and statutory health insurance association have made an excellent contribution.
734 We Freie Demokraten are pleased about the positive development of the Dortmund clinic in recent years.
Together with other hospitals in the city, it offers excellent medicine and care.
The economic situation has also developed positively.
737 At the same time, we stand by the practicing doctors and will ensure that the Dortmund municipal hospital only becomes active on an outpatient basis where care by practicing doctors is not sufficient.
738 For all social services, we believe that offers by the city should not displace private providers or unreasonably disadvantage them in the competition for the best solutions.
739 If, for example, the Dortmund municipal hospital offers special integrated care models, these should not only be open to city service providers.
740 Municipal Security Concept 746 Dortmund must be a safe place.
The municipal security concept initiated by the city of Dortmund is a good start.
This concept alone is not enough for us.
When securing public spaces, we rely on partnerships for law and order, i.e.
the intensified cooperation between police and the public order office.
In this context, we demand increased joint patrols by police and public order officials.
The personnel and material equipment of both institutions must meet the highest standards.
Good 752 police officers and -employees and employees of the Ordnungsamt can only do their job well if they experience the highest appreciation from their employer.
754 A city without fear -spaces 756 We Freie Demokraten wish for a city without fear -spaces.
In this context we demand an improved lighting at so-called fear -locations in the city.
Through an appropriate adaptation of streets, paths, underpasses and squares we want to eliminate existing danger points and prevent new danger points from arising.
The citizen app can serve as a smart solution to point the city to such fear -spaces.
We Freie Demokraten reject a comprehensive video surveillance.
We will only agree to video surveillance if a location in question is a crime hotspot and thus the security is improved by, for example, allowing the police to intervene more quickly.
765 Zero tolerance gang crime  767 We Freie Demokraten welcome the fact that the current state government has made the fight against gang crime a priority.
We speak out in favor of continuing the intensive cooperation of all involved parties and the clear zero tolerance strategy The fight against crime, especially organized or clan crime, can be supported by the city, especially by taking action against derelict properties.
We will not tolerate the dilapidation of entire streets.
We need a comprehensive strategy for dealing with problem properties, in which all the departments involved work together across all departments.
It is clear to us that there can be no lawless areas at any time or in any place in Dortmund.
Tough on hard drugs Furthermore, better information and prevention strategies are needed, as well as the appropriate maintenance of drug treatment facilities.
We expressly support both methadone substitution and the concept of pressure reduction.
A cleaner city is often also a safer city: We, the Free Democrats in Dortmund, want to work towards preventing the illegal disposal of waste.
Therefore, in cooperation with the EDG, there will be a free so-called bulky waste collection day for the whole of Dortmund, similar to other cities.
The EDG will collect bulky waste from people's homes.
In addition, the city needs more litter bins to combat waste.
We also advocate for the use of new recycling containers that can already inform waste disposal companies in advance when they are about to become completely full.
Uncoordinated long-term construction sites are another ongoing annoyance for citizens and logistics in Dortmund.
For small retailers, they are sometimes life-threatening.
Measures for road maintenance and infrastructure measures for water, energy, telecommunications and high-speed internet should be better coordinated and bundled over a longer period of time.
Furthermore, the construction site management must ensure that construction times are as short as possible.
It is not acceptable for streets to be torn up for weeks on end, but for only sporadic work to be done.
Communication with the affected citizens and businesses is in urgent need of improvement.
Living and residing in Dortmund is good.
Dortmund is a large city.
Just like other large cities, the housing market in Dortmund has developed dynamically.
In order for housing to remain affordable for people in Dortmund in the future, the housing market in Dortmund must continue to meet the needs of citizens.
Private investments.
A good housing policy for Dortmund is based on the fact that private investments are promoted through timely building permits.
Only additional living space creates permanently affordable living space through a balanced ratio of supply and demand.
We reject the nationalization of housing companies, because it does not create new living space at first.
Rather, we must ensure that the increasing demand in the future can also be met, especially with regard to “affordable housing”.
822 Densification before land consumption 824 The Dortmund Free Democrats are pleased about the increasing number of inhabitants.
However, this will mean that the demand for living space will continue to rise in the future.
We, as the Free Democrats, are in favour of densification as a means of creating new living space.
Wherever possible, densification should be carried out in existing residential areas, as this should always be the preferred option for the short-term creation of living space.
The approval process for the extension of houses and the conversion of flat roofs into living space should be made quicker and simpler.
We want to preserve green corridors and limit land consumption.
Open spaces should only be developed if this is absolutely necessary for the creation of new living space or important jobs.
836 Climate-friendly town planning The city must step up its efforts here and renovate its own buildings more quickly.
This includes not only insulating the building shell, but also a climate-friendly electoral programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -21- Concept of heat supply - depending on local conditions, by increasing energy efficiency, connecting to district heating networks or retrofitting with renewable heat sources.
We support the greening of roofs and facades and the use of roof spaces for the generation of renewable energy.
Even options for urban gardening should be examined.
851 All these measures - from building renovation to greening - should be promoted by the city.
With regard to private building owners, we reject interference with property rights, but we want better dialogue between the city and these goals - both in public relations, advice on funding programmes from the federal government and the state, as well as in specific building applications.
856 Creative living  858 We want to work to ensure that creative ideas are given the opportunity to come to fruition when creating living space.
Modular living, but also so-called T 862 Barrier-free living and urban planning in the demographic change 864 In the demographic change we need more barrier-free living space for the elderly and barrier-free living space for people with disabilities.
Not only in housing construction and in the renovation of buildings, but also in public and cooperative housing companies, we need to focus on this.
In general, the barrier-free living in our city must be developed further as a principle of urban planning, neighborhood by neighborhood.
The barrier-free communication services of the city should also be further developed.
870 Development of the harbor and planning of similar projects 872 We Freie Demokraten welcome the efforts of the city to further develop the area of the Dortmund harbor.
The further development of these areas in other cities has already shown how successful such concepts can be.
However, the conceptual development should always be carried out in consensus, taking into account existing structures and existing residents.
It would not be useful to simply “copy” any concepts from other cities for further development – rather, such a project should be carried out by the population, in our opinion.
879 Own homes According to current knowledge, a reimbursement of 40% will be possible through a funding program of the state of NRW.
The city of Dortmund should in future take on 60% of the costs itself, instead of passing them on to the citizens and residents.
891 Free Wi-Fi, free city 893 We Freie Demokraten welcome the Freifunk initiative and their voluntary commitment.
894 “Freifunk” cannot replace a solution through the city of Dortmund.
Rather, we demand the establishment of a free city radio network, as is common in many large cities.
Municipal funds and other subsidies should be concentrated on this.
Only professional facilities can meet the requirements of the future with the necessary data volumes.
It is also possible to provide coverage throughout the entire city and to ensure that many users can use it at the same time.
In particular, this should also be possible at “hotspots” such as tourist attractions.
901 Sporty Dortmund 903 Dortmund is a sports city.
The performance sport from BVB to the performance centers for 904 athletics, rowing and gymnastics is a real location factor for the city.
In addition, 905 the amateur sport has an important function for health, leisure time and integration.
906 Commercial offers such as fitness studios and also the e-sport belong to us.
We 907 Free Democrats therefore support the sports clubs in the city and want to secure them good 908 framework conditions.
Sports facilities are just as important as swimming lessons for children 909 to be developed according to demand.
Through the creation of more teaching swimming areas 910 we want to comply with the obligation to provide education.
911 Traffic change: Good and climate-friendly mobility in Dortmund  914 Our city is growing, the mobility needs are increasing and at the same time we are facing a 915 massive challenge through climate change.
We Free Democrats want to achieve an effective traffic change towards good and climate-friendly mobility.
We want to create outstanding public mobility offers, use individual mobility offers in common and We are relying on attractive offers, good infrastructure and market-oriented management.
A change of direction with the people - not against them.
Capacities on the railways.
The Stadtbahn must make better use of the infrastructure in order to transport more Dortmund residents on the railways.
Overcrowded trains do not motivate anyone to switch.
We need an investment programme that acquires the necessary control technology in the tunnel and the necessary equipment - for tighter sequence of events and longer trains, wherever this is feasible.
The start of operations on Sundays and the timetable in the evening hours is in need of improvement in bus and Stadtbahn traffic on some lines.
The election programme of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020 -23- Extended and new lines in public transport.
We support considerations to connect the former Hoesch Spundwandgelände ("Smart Rhino") with a junction of the U43/U44.
The technology parks at the university and on the new site should be connected with an extension of the H-Bahn.
We plead for the continuous two-lane expansion of the above Alternatively or additionally, the expansion of the H-938 railway to Kosten and Nutzen is to be evaluated and, if necessary, implemented.
939 The Free Democrats are also in favour of expanding the existing night bus concept.
In particular, an expansion of the timetable should take place during the week.
942 Ride Sharing - the update for the call-a-taxi service 944 We want to start a modern, digital version of the call-a-taxi service, especially in the outer districts.
The plans of the DSW to concentrate digital offers on the inner city area, where there is already good public transport, go past the mobility requirements of young people.
948 Standards in the U-Bahn and regional transport 950 We welcome the fact that the DSW is working in cooperation with the mobile phone operators to achieve continuous availability of mobile phones in the tunnels.
We want to use the VRR to ensure that WLAN and power sockets become the standard in all tenders for S-Bahn, regional express and regional railway lines in the Ruhr area - just as is already the case The eastern inner city and the district of Brackel should be connected to the airport at a low cost by a new bus line 962 from U43 in Brackel.
963 Safety in public transport 965 Safety and cleanliness in the trains and underground stations including the platforms must be guaranteed.
The security service must concentrate its work on these tasks and intervene strictly and preventively in the case of potential disruptors and violent people.
969 Making cycling safer and more attractive 971 We, the Free Democrats in Dortmund, welcome the city's goal of becoming a "cycling city" in the future.
This includes the expansion of the cycle network.
A sensible networking and the connection of individual important nodes should be the priority election program of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020.
The expansion of the cycle network should be based on actual demand.
Larger projects in the city area are quality assurance and improvement of cycle paths throughout the city.
Many cycle paths are repeatedly interrupted, they wind dangerously from the footpath onto the road or are missing altogether.
However, 979 Safe cycling infrastructure gradually includes a clear and separate traffic light system for cyclists.
Only with a clearly visible and separate signage of cycle paths and clear traffic management can the different road users be prevented from getting in each other's way.
1001 The current popularity of e-bikes requires an expansion of charging stations throughout the entire city, in order to always give citizens the opportunity to charge the batteries of their bicycles.
Ultimately, in the city centre, there needs to be an improvement in parking facilities for bicycles.
1003 Streets and pavements are well maintained 1005 Whether you drive a car or take the bus, the city's streets must be in good condition.
We place the emphasis on the good maintenance of the roads within the existing infrastructure.
This also applies to pavements, which must be safe for all pedestrians.
In the area of road construction, we want to speed up the construction of the North Spur in order to relieve traffic and emissions in the northern part of the city.
1007 Parking space management instead of parking displacement 1009 A At the same time, we reject the attempts to artificially limit parking spaces without providing an alternative for citizens.
Specifically, we support an increase in parking fees within the Wallring - both on the streets and in the parking garages.
This should be done progressively according to duration, so that short-term parkers are not affected.
In return, parking fees in the suburban centers should be completely waived - also to revitalize the secondary centers within the city.
The city-center zones such as Kaiser and Saarlandstraße should retain their previous regulations.
At the same time, parking management should be introduced for the Park&Ride parking lots of the DSW - the parking ticket should then be valid as a ticket for up to 5 people in the city center.
Infrastructure for alternative drives 1016 Such an offer strategy is a contribution to not having to continue with the policy of traffic restrictions.
Traffic bans are not our way.
If emissions are reduced overall by alternative drives through the election program of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the local elections on 13.09.2020 -25-, traffic restrictions like after the legal settlement for the implementation of the European immission protection requirements must be reviewed and, if necessary, lifted again.
1021 Efficient management of airports 1023 The airport has positive effects for the economic location and the mobility of the people of Dortmund.
At the same time, numerous people in Dortmund and Unna are affected by flight noise.
In this balance, we stand for the preservation of the airport within the framework of the current infrastructure.
However, permanent subsidies at the expense of the city and the city utilities cannot be accepted.
The airport company must achieve at least an equal operational result.
The necessary adjustments in operating times and runway utilization have been made.
Before the Corona crisis, the economic prospects of the airport were positive for the first time in a long time, but the management must avoid the looming dependence on a dominant airline through diversification.
We want to draw attention to this in the supervisory board of the airport.
Further improvement of the long-distance train connection.
Fast and frequent long-distance train connections are the key to business travel to and from Dortmund.
The Dortmund municipal politicians must insist on the urgent expansion of the bottleneck Dortmund-Münster line in order to speed up traffic in the direction of Hamburg.
Reduce traffic noise.
Traffic noise is one of the greatest environmental burdens in large cities.
Dortmund has not given this issue sufficient priority.
This is already shown by the fact that the noise council has rarely met.
We Freie Demokraten want to change this.
The use of noise-reducing asphalt, better traffic light switching to avoid loud "stop and go", the reduction of noise in public transport and locally limited and justified speed limits on particularly heavily loaded roads are elements of a comprehensive inner-city noise protection program.
We reject blanket speed limit zones of 30 km/ With regard to the noise from highways, rail and air traffic, a regular dialogue with the responsible authorities and companies should be conducted on possible improvements.
Green right turn arrow  1054 The time we spend in traffic jams is lost time.
In order to improve the traffic situation in the city and to meet individual traffic situations, we demand that the green right turn arrow (traffic sign 720 “Green arrow sign”) be used more frequently.
1057 Conflicts with bicycle traffic should be taken into account.
1058 Election program of the Dortmund Free Democrats for the municipal elections on 13.09.2020 -26- Intelligent traffic control systems  1060 Traffic jams are a huge ecological and economic problem.
A large bundle of measures is necessary to reduce traffic jams.
A decisive pillar for us is a modernization of traffic control systems.
1063 We demand the introduction of a model project for intelligent traffic control systems on congested roads into the city (for example Hamburger Straße).
The system of KI -Am- 1065 peln and 1066 Greening of bus and train stops  1068 Bus and train stops are often a bleak place.
We want to strengthen the attractiveness of these places and promote ecological measures at the same time.
By greening bus stops, Co2 can be bound and the city can be made more visually attractive.
The greening must not impair traffic safety.
The financing should, in the ideal case, not be paid for by the taxpayer, but by private sponsoring initiatives.
1073 We demand the establishment of sponsoring partnerships for the greening of bus and train stops.
The sponsor receives, in exchange for linked advertising opportunities, the responsibility for the maintenance of the greening.