Solidarity.
Municipal Election Program 2025 DIE LINKE District Association Dortmund Rheinische Straße 56, 44137 Dortmund Telephone: (0231) 222 1116/1117 E-Mail: info@dielinke-dortmund.de Responsible for content: Kevin Götz, District Speaker Layout: Alena Blaß & Jennifer Wrona Editorial work: Svenja Gräfen Status: May 2025 www.dielinke-dortmund.de @dielinke_dortmund Imprint 3 Housing justice 8 Housing is a human right 9 Solidarity in the renovation of existing homes 11 Good housing even with little money 13 For a community-oriented land policy 14 Social housing expansion 16 Housing First against homelessness 18 Municipal heat planning – but solidarity!
20 Mobility and mobility justice 22 Expanding public transport 23 Good mobility with the bicycle 25 Strengthening Together.
Solidarity.
Justice: Our Dortmund.
The Left is the party of social justice.
We are standing up against social division – at the federal level by advocating for a wealth tax and an inheritance tax, and at the local level by fighting for social services, good schools and swimming pools.
We are the party that fights for a good life for all!
The conditions for good local politics are more difficult than ever.
The black-red coalition has made it clear that they do not want to improve the financial situation of the municipalities, but rather continue to save on expenses.
Municipalities are already struggling to make ends meet, and in NRW many are in financial distress.
At the same time, life is becoming more difficult for the majority of the population.
The prices for food, mobility and other essential things are rising more and more.
Many people have problems to afford their lives.
The rents in Dortmund are also rising more and more – it is impossible for families to find an apartment that they can afford.
Homelessness is increasing and people living on the streets are being treated more and more harshly.
At the same time, right-wing forces are gaining strength.
Their success in elections is making migrants, queer people and disabled people afraid, and rightly so.
We clearly stand against racism and right-wing hate – everywhere!
We especially stand up for people who have it harder.
We fight for disadvantaged neighborhoods and for people in poverty, against discrimination and exclusion.
We will not get tired of standing up for people who are so often forgotten by politics.
In doing so, we do not only make politics for people, but with them.
We are on the move in the city - we are knocking on doors, talking to residents and taking their voices with us to the parliament.
We are approachable, present and reliable.
And we have a clear stance: social, anti-fascist, climate-friendly and anti-capitalist.
These issues are at the forefront of our local elections: housing is a human right, and Dortmund needs affordable housing above all else.
We want to strengthen the housing office and take action against unlawful practices by landlords.
For homeless people, we demand Housing First instead of displacement.
Children and youth We are particularly committed to children and young people.
At the local level, this means: good school buildings, many school social workers, free meals for every child and sufficient good childcare places.
In addition, we need places for young people where they can meet and hang out for free.
We are committed to good healthcare in Dortmund.
This includes supporting the city's clinics and children's clinic, campaigning for more doctors in every district and creating additional services such as health kiosks.
The topic of health also includes a healthy environment: protection from heat stress, air pollution and noise, especially in disadvantaged districts.
Everyone has the right to be mobile.
This includes good public transport in Dortmund, which we want to make free in the long term.
We are committed to safe cycle paths that children can also use, good footpaths and sufficient seating in public spaces.
Housing is a human right.
We stand for a housing policy that is oriented towards the needs of people and not the market.
Housing should not be a commodity that generates profits.
It is about more than just a roof over your head: everyone should be able to live well, safely and affordably in Dortmund, without fear of rent increases or displacement - because housing is a human right!
More and more people are affected by housing poverty.
The number of poor households is rising significantly when housing costs are taken into account.
Over 21% of the population in Germany are affected by housing poverty, which corresponds to more than 17 million people.
This also includes recipients of social assistance and other transfer payments: These are around 500 euros below the limit at which one is no longer considered to be (housing) poor.
In addition to the exploding rental prices, the energy costs are also driving millions of households into existential distress.
The consequences are dramatic: Around half a million people are homeless in Germany, and the number of forced evictions is continuously increasing.
Especially for large families with five or more persons who are dependent on affordable housing, there are hardly any offers that are publicly funded.
In Dortmund, rents have risen by more than 50% in the last ten years.
Affordable housing is becoming scarce, especially for families, single parents and people with low incomes.
Many have to live in too small apartments or have difficulties finding accommodation at all.
The rental system is being redistributed from the bottom up: While tenants have to pay a large They are not renovating, but rather increasing the rent and distributing profits to shareholders.
Although many of the levers of housing policy lie at the state or federal level, there are opportunities in Dortmund to significantly improve the situation for tenants on the ground – and we want to use them decisively.
The Left is clearly on the side of the tenants.
We are fighting for: • the socialisation of large housing corporations • a strong municipal housing stock • real co-determination for tenants At the federal level, we are calling for: • an effective rent cap • the abolition of evictions for own use • the right of tenant associations to take legal action for housing justice We are fighting for the abolition of the modernisation surcharge.
For Dortmund, social welfare ordinances are necessary, particularly for the Nordstadt.
They oblige any modernisation to be approved.
This can prevent unnecessary modernisations that only serve to increase the rent.
Renovations, on the other hand, serve to maintain the homes and may not be passed on to the rent.
For housing corporations, they are often not profitable, which is why homes fall into disrepair and necessary measures, such Unused or poorly managed living space should be returned to public ownership.
The city of Dortmund must also use the instrument of expropriation for this.
The Dortmund Zweckentfremdungs-Satzung already provides effective means for this.
Examples where this is necessary are the two Hannibal buildings and the building complex at Hackländerplatz.
In Dortmund, the proportion of homes owned by profit-oriented housing corporations is particularly high.
Vonovia is characterized by excessive additional cost calculations.
LEG increases rents more than would be allowed according to the rent index.
This is possible because the index specifies a range, although it has been legally established that the average value is decisive for rent increases.
Vonovia thinks up abstruse reasons to deviate from the range.
We demand that the rent index only contain the average value, is based on the existing rents and that deviations are only possible for specified reasons.
Modernizations can be passed on to the rent at 8% and are thus an instrument to increase rents particularly drastically.
This often leads to long-term tenants being forced out because they can no longer afford the rent.
WohnungsgerechtigkeitBestandswohnungen solidarisch gestalten DOGEWO für Mieter*innen The city of Dortmund has a municipal housing company and a company that can transfer land for development and make purchases with the DOGEWO and the DSG (Dortmunder Stadtentwicklungsgesellschaft).
However, DOGEWO operates profit-oriented and not in the interests of tenants.
Large profit distributions to DSW21 mean that tenants indirectly subsidize Dortmund Airport.
We demand that DOGEWO does not distribute profits.
In addition, DOGEWO increases all rents according to the Dortmunder Mietspiegel – which is continuously rising.
With the rent increases, DOGEWO fuels this development.
Therefore, we demand a rent freeze for DOGEWO.
Rent increases may only be based on actual cost increases.
Profits must be fully reinvested and kept within the company.
The Left demands: • no profit distribution at DOGEWO, • more stock in DSG and DOGEW Housing justice Page 12 About half of the people in Dortmund are entitled to a housing allowance or housing benefit.
The proportion of income spent on rent is particularly high in Dortmund.
That is why people with low incomes must be helped specifically at the local level.
Even if we as the Left are of the opinion that instead of housing benefit, effective rent control is necessary and not the subsidization of tenants, we are also fighting to support tenants in a concrete way.
In Dortmund, housing benefit is sometimes paid too late, which means that people have to fear losing their homes.
The Left is therefore calling for well-equipped housing offices that can quickly process all applications.
It must not happen that delays in processing put people in financial difficulties.
The cost of accommodation must be adjusted to the development of rents.
The Left has achieved in Dortmund that the adequacy limits of the cost of accommodation are set on the basis of the current asking rents.
The rents are revalued annually and the benefits are adjusted accordingly.
This has reduced the number of forced moves.
The actual cost of accommodation must be fully covered for people who receive transfer payments.
According to the SGB II (Citizens' Money), the job center is obliged to take over the housing costs - that is, rent and heating costs (costs of accommodation or KdU) - in actual amount, provided they are "reasonable".
The definition of "reasonableness" lies with the individual municipalities and has been disputed for years.
If the housing costs are considered unreasonably high, the job center demands that the affected parties reduce the costs.
After a period of six months, the job center will only take over the costs considered reasonable.
The difference must be borne by the affected parties.
This creates a housing cost gap.
In the state of North Rhine-Westphalia, this coverage gap amounted to 82.28 euros for all affected households in 2022; in some municipalities, even up to 131.16 euros.
Housing justiceGood living conditions even with little money Housing justiceThe Left demands: • Taking over the actual housing costs for people who receive A common good oriented land policy The argument of the lack of housing is used to legitimize the sale of land in good locations to investors and speculators.
However, land is not a commodity like any other due to its limited availability.
The containment of land speculation is a central task of left-wing politics.
By granting land in ground lease, the city of Dortmund can permanently influence its use and design and prevent land speculation.
Therefore, we demand that ground lease be significantly expanded and that no land that has already been granted in ground lease be sold.
This also applies to commercial land.
The importance of communal ownership is shown by the development area at the harbor and the WohnungsgerechtigkeitSpeicherstraße: A social and common good oriented urban development is only possible because the land belongs to the city and is granted in ground lease.
Now these areas are being sold to investors and the city is giving up future opportunities for influence.
We want to prevent this!
Through a forward-looking land policy, strategically important land can be secured early on and the scope of action of the municipalities can be expanded.
We demand the consistent expansion of this strategy and the targeted acquisition of strategically important land.
A major problem is that land sales are usually dealt with in non-public sessions.
This means that far-reaching decisions are made without the public having the opportunity to express their opinion – such as with the high-rise building with the new Nord police station.
We therefore demand a transparency ordinance based on the model of the city of Offenbach.
There, important data on land sales is also made available in public documents, including the location, size and purchase price of the land.
The associated urban development plans must also be publicly accessible.
Housing justiceSocial housing In Dortmund, there is a housing shortage.
With a vacancy rate of 1.3%, there are hardly any available apartments that people can move into.
Therefore, Dortmund urgently needs the construction of new, permanently occupied and price-controlled rental apartments.
We demand that the social obligations in the future must not be allowed to expire, but must continue to exist.
Furthermore, we want to increase the social housing quota to 70%.
Due to the increased construction costs, social housing has become attractive for investors.
We want to make sure that new construction projects are also possible with 100% social housing – and we reject the myth that this leads to ghettoization.
The crisis on the housing market cannot be solved by new construction alone, because it is expensive and according to the housing market report, it is over 12 euros per square meter.
Due to the increased construction costs, many new construction projects are significantly higher than that.
Therefore, new construction must always be combined with further measures for affordable housing, which will lower rents overall.
The Dortmund City Development Company (DSG) has created the prerequisites to also implement construction and renovation projects at the municipal level.
Acquired stocks must be renovated, barrier-free and energy-efficiently modernized.
However, these measures must not lead to the displacement of tenants.
In the planning of new construction areas, we place value on a well-developed social infrastructure.
This includes day care centers, schools, shopping and meeting places as well as good connections to public transport.
Green spaces and parks, children's playgrounds and youth centers are also important.
We support the development of neighborhoods in which people can live well and safely without a car.
We also demand that all new apartments be built completely barrier-free in order to finally meet the enormous demand for barrier-free living space.
As the Left, we are fundamentally against the expansion of single-family home developments, as these consume disproportionately large amounts of space compared to multi-story apartment buildings.
In a city like Dortmund with its high population density and urgent housing shortage, not a single single-family home should be built.
Instead, we want to promote good concepts for communal living, such as multi-generational houses.
Where ground lease agreements are in place in single-family home developments, concepts for socially acceptable densification should be developed.
The Left demands: • An expansion of the quota for social housing construction • The enabling of pure social construction projects, • No further construction of single-family homes, • The preference for cooperatives For this, the municipal housing supervision must be better equipped financially and in terms of personnel.
The housing supervision should consistently take action against vacancy, but also against other violations such as excessive rent and overpriced rent.
It must also intervene in the case of neglect of living space and initiate substitute measures.
In doing so, it must always act in the interest of the affected tenants and find solutions for them.
Even if owners deliberately let denkmal-protected buildings fall into disrepair in order to obtain demolition permits, the city must take action in a timely manner.
There should be no demolition permits for such buildings.
The number of homeless people has increased sharply in recent years, but it is difficult to determine exact figures.
In Dortmund, it is currently assumed that there are 500-600 homeless people.
Experience shows that approximately ten times as many people are homeless – they do not have their own living space and have temporarily moved in with friends or relatives.
Due to growing poverty, more and more people are losing their homes.
The Left is calling for: • Better equipping of the municipal housing department, especially with budget funds for replacement housing, • Consistent action against vacant properties, short-term rentals, excessive rent increases and neglect of living space, • A publicly accessible vacant property register.
Housing First against homelessness Housing justiceIn Dortmund alone, five homeless people died on the streets within three weeks in the winter of 2025.
Every single death is one too many and shows the dramatic situation in the city.
Immediate, unbureaucratic help is needed for homeless people to prevent further deaths.
The Left wants to effectively combat homelessness with the Housing First system.
People should be placed in their own apartments.
In addition, they should be supported according to their individual needs, for example by social educators, debt counselling, addiction support or psychologists.
The council has already decided on the introduction of Housing First by a joint motion from the Left, Greens and CDU with a majority.
However, the administration is only implementing the system inadequately.
Here, we need to increase the pressure.
We want to expand the housing reserve The current situation in the emergency overnight accommodation facilities in Dortmund is not sustainable.
In particular, the men's overnight accommodation facility on Unionstraße, which is operated by European Homecare, is characterised by violence and such poor conditions that people would rather sleep on the street at night than stay there.
The Left wants all emergency overnight accommodation facilities to be transferred into municipal hands.
They must be safe for those who use them - for example, by having lockable single rooms - and must also offer the possibility of staying there during the day.
It must also be possible to take dogs with them.
In addition, there must be overnight accommodation facilities that also allow drug use.
Separate safe spaces must be created for queer homeless people.
All emergency overnight accommodation facilities must be accessible free of charge at all times.
We welcome the introduction of low-threshold overnight accommodation facilities in containers and demand their rapid implementation.
However, these facilities must not be located exclusively in the Nordstadt district - an area of the city that is already struggling with the greatest social challenges.
Furthermore, Die Linke in Dortmund is calling for the future abandonment of so-called defensive architecture.
Public facilities and furnishings must not be designed to drive homeless people away or make their stay unattractive.
This includes cold benches with dividers that prevent people from lying down, spikes on edges and even bicycle racks that do not allow people to stay under eaves.
Public spaces should invite people to stay and also allow for longer stays.
The fact that homeless people use them for overnight stays should be tolerated by the majority of society.
For these people, it is a matter of survival, especially in winter.
At the same time, it must be ensured that there are enough seats available so that everyone can find a place to sit.
Municipal heat planning, but in a solidarity-based way!
The federal government has obliged municipalities to draw up a municipal heat plan.
However, the federal government is not providing the funds required to implement it.
For Dortmund alone, the conversion would cost around 3 billion euros.
This money is not available at the municipal level.
DEW21 has managed to develop a concept for a CO2-free district heating supply in cooperation with the Dortmunder Gasrußwerke.
The Dortmunder Gasrußwerke previously needed natural gas for the controlled production of their carbon black products.
DEW21 will now generate green hydrogen via its own photovoltaic systems, which can be used for the production of the Gasrußwerke, as well as the waste heat provided by them for the district heating network of DEW21.
This will make both the production of the Gasrußwerke and the waste heat provided by them for the district heating network of DEW21 climate-neutral.
The Left supports this concept.
The further expansion of the district heating network is sensible, but must take social aspects into account.
The expansion must not lead to increased costs for users.
The involvement of large profit-oriented real estate corporations as “anchor customers” suggests that heating costs for their tenants will rise and a new business model will emerge.
The district heating connection must remain affordable for tenants in particular and must not lead to significant additional costs.
The Dortmund power grid must be modernized and expanded for the widespread use of heat pumps and electric mobility.
The DEW21 subsidiary DONETZ will require around one billion euros in investment funds for this.
The shareholders DSW and Westenergie AG are currently providing 100 million euros to address the biggest bottlenecks in the grid.
However, this sum is not sufficient for comprehensive coverage.
Without additional federal funds, the conversion will not be successful.
The owners of the buildings must also invest heavily to make their building stocks fit for heat pumps.
This requires financial support from the state and federal government.
Without this aid, the conversion costs for single-family home owners will be hardly affordable – and tenants will ultimately bear the costs via the modernization surcharge.
The Left says: We need solid public financing by the state and federal government as well as stable energy prices for consumers.
The Left demands: • no use of hydrogen outside of industrial processes in which it is absolutely necessary, as well as wood in heating Housing justice Page 21 Traffic and mobility justice Public transport: expand attractively In Dortmund, the transport revolution has so far failed.
The proportion of motorised individual transport (MIV) has hardly fallen, the expansion of public transport and cycle paths is only slowly progressing, if at all.
A large part of the urban traffic areas is reserved for motor vehicles, which means that the city centre and the town centre are dominated by MIV.
Public transport is the most efficient and socially acceptable mass transport medium.
That is why it must be given priority in the city's planning - both in urban development and in traffic management.
Public transport scores points above all because it is space-saving, can be designed to be accessible to all citizens and makes a significant contribution to economic mobility.
In order to be able to use these advantages in the long term, political measures are needed to drive forward the expansion of a robust and future-proof network.
The focus must be on the expansion of the rail network.
The Left demands: • Implementation of the expansion plans already drawn up by DSW21 Stadtbahn lines; these include, among other things, the extension to the south in Hörde and Hacheney, Transport and Mobility Justice Page 23 • the creation of plans to connect more districts to the city tramway, which still do not have a sufficient connection to it; the focus of these plans should be, among other things, the connection of large residential areas and workplaces, as well as the train stations in the outskirts, • the expansion and better connections of city and S-Bahn to the region.
DSW21 has already published considerations for a two-system city tramway to the east.
These plans must be concretized and implemented in order to better connect cities such as Kamen and Hamm, • the connection of the Dortmund city tramway network to the rest of the Ruhr area; planning with other transport companies and the adjacent municipalities must be undertaken for this purpose, • the establishment of dedicated bus lanes, • the construction of overhead bus systems must be examined, as they represent an environmentally friendly alternative to battery-powered buses.
It must be examined whether the system can later be easily converted to a tramway, • the connection of Dortmund universities and the campus, primarily through the city tramway.
An expansion of the H-Bahn would be an Cycling is a particularly fair form of mobility: Even children and people with physical disabilities can be on the move quickly thanks to e-bikes.
For this to work, the cycle paths must be designed to be safe, which is currently not the case in Dortmund.
The cycle lanes are too narrow and often only exist as traffic and mobility markings on the road, and the proximity to car traffic and the many intersections make cycling dangerous and put many people off.
This must change: Cycle paths must be safe and comfortable, so that everyone – especially children – have the opportunity to move around freely and safely on their bikes.
The Left demands: • The expansion of cycle paths not only towards the centres, but throughout the entire city area; cycle paths must not be patchwork or zigzag routes.
• In addition to the cycle routes, the main routes must also be expanded; these must be laid out as protected bike lanes, i.e.
protected cycle lanes through structural separation; for this, car lanes must be removed.
• At intersections, there must be separate green phases and green waves for cyclists.
Cycle paths must not contain “fear-weichen”, In addition, the expansion of bicycle sheds must be more strongly promoted - especially in poorer districts, the personal contribution should be waived.
Additional bicycle parking spaces are also necessary at bus stops and in the city centre.
However, these must by no means be part of defensive architecture; • more controls and harsher punishment of those who park incorrectly on bicycle and pedestrian paths as well as in intersections, especially if they endanger other road users.
The entire municipal order service (KOD) will be used for traffic monitoring; • dangerous places - such as cycle paths that suddenly lead onto the road - must be redesigned with a view to the safety of cyclists; at the locations where accidents have occurred, the road traffic and mobility department must be changed in order to avoid similar accidents in the future.
• the cycle path must not be discontinued at construction sites.
Cyclists must be protected by their own barriers, just like pedestrians.
Restrictions may only be at the expense of car traffic.
Existing laws must be applied here; • free transport of bicycles, cargo bicycles and bicycle trailers in public The cycle expressway with the name RS1 was started as a flagship project and is now characterised above all by constant delays.
The expansion of the RS1 must be driven forward.
In this case, it should be decided in favour of crossings and the construction of bridge structures.
• In addition to the RS1, there is a need for further cycle paths in neighbouring towns.
The Ruhr area is characterised by a high population density.
Thanks to e-bikes, commuting is possible by bike without any problems, even between towns.
This requires the necessary cycle infrastructure.
• More cycle programmes for children and young people with free bicycles and cycling lessons.
This can also be subsidised by the district councils.
• Establishment of a cycle network, separate from car traffic.
Especially in new residential areas, there is the possibility to build separate bike paths independent of car roads, similar to what has been common practice in the Netherlands for a long time.
• Target speed of 30 km/h.
We demand that the standard speed in cities be set to 30 km/h.
As long as this is not the case, we want to remove as many streets as possible from the reserved network in Dortmund and use the possibilities of speed reduction similar to high noise pollution.
30 km/h is a good speed for cities, as noise and pollution decrease and the number and severity of accidents decrease.
• Expansion of rental systems for bicycles.
These should be in the hands of the municipal or public authorities.
• Redesign of the Wall with spacious bike and foot paths as well as possible development.
The Wall is currently a racetrack where speeding and noise pollution occur regularly, including through illegal races.
At the same time, it is a barrier for pedestrian and bike traffic into the city center.
A redesign is urgently needed here, in which car lanes and parking spaces are reduced and instead more space is created for pedestrians and cyclists, as well as for additional greening and tree planting.
Traffic and mobility justicePedestrians are primarily children, young people, recipients of social benefits and senior citizens.
Every second citizen in Dortmund – statistically including the very elderly and infants – owns a car.
There can be no talk of equal traffic participants in a car-friendly city like Dortmund.
Pedestrians are disadvantaged.
Time and again there are fatal accidents involving them.
In 2023, 423 pedestrians died in traffic accidents in Germany – more than the previous year (368).
In total, 2,839 people lost their lives on German roads in 2023.
According to the modal split (distribution of traffic volume among different modes of transport), the proportion of walking routes in Dortmund is comparatively high.
Nevertheless, many short distances are unnecessarily driven by car.
Noisy, unattractive streets without sufficient shade, poor air quality and pedestrian-unfriendly traffic light sequences with long waiting times deter many people from moving around on foot.
As a result, the number of cars on the road increases, public spaces become deserted, noise levels rise, air quality deteriorates and both the inner city and the global climate are additionally burdened.
A pedestrian-friendly city enables all people to move around safely, comfortably and quickly on foot.
This requires well-lit and shady paths, free pedestrian zones without parked cars and safe and barrier-free crossing possibilities – such as zebra crossings or traffic lights that react quickly.
In addition, there should also be places to rest and play for children.
Pedestrians are often overlooked in traffic planning, even though they are the group with the greatest need for protection.
After all, walking is the simplest, healthiest, cheapest and most environmentally friendly form of mobility.
It creates space for encounters, conversations and a lively togetherness in public spaces – in other words, for exactly what makes a city worth living in.
People of all age Traffic lights with multiple sections must be designed in such a way that waiting is not done in the middle of the street.
The expansion of 30 km/h zones, more play streets and more zebra crossings.
The sidewalks must be widened in many places (for example Rheinische Straße).
Parking on sidewalks should not be tolerated.
• More monitoring of air pollution through additional measuring stations.
• Fast and sufficient switching of demand-controlled traffic lights for pedestrians.
• Reduction of lanes on the Wall, structural speed reduction and simpler crossings over wider sidewalks.
Goods transport must be fundamentally restructured in Dortmund.
A too large proportion of transport takes place with trucks, which leads to poor traffic and mobility justice.
The Left demands: • The examination and introduction of a pilot project for the construction of a Cargo Tram network; the Stadtbahn and rail network in Dortmund should be used for this purpose to transport goods over short distances from logistics centers to businesses.
• No expansion of OWIIIa (highway-like connecting road from west to east) towards Asseln and Wick • An expansion of environmental zones to reduce heavy traffic throughout the city; more staff must be hired for the controls.
• Regular traffic counts at all traffic junctions with a high proportion of lorries in order to be able to make statements about the actual burden.
• The delivery traffic within pedestrian zones must be further tested and promoted with small-scale (semi-)automatic transport systems.
• The preservation of the Dortmund waterways as an alternative to air and lorry traffic.
We therefore consider the expansion of the container terminal to be useful as long as the concept takes noise and pollutant reduction into account.
The environmental balance must be taken into account, streets are particularly burdened and residents are disturbed by noise.
Therefore, the city must ensure that goods transport is better regulated, alternatives to lorries are strengthened and deliveries are made more efficiently.
At the federal level, Die Linke demands that the post office be brought into public ownership.
Following this, Die Linke Dortmund demands that transport for post and local delivery be brought under municipal control in order to guarantee secure jobs and climate-friendly deliveries and to bundle delivery processes.
This means that several different companies and subcontract Jobs in public transport should be prioritised.Demolition of the airport The Dortmund airport is one of the biggest environmental offenders in the city.
The years of cross-subsidisation of the airport by the DSW have led to considerable deficiencies in the expansion of public transport.Transport and mobility justiceThe Left demands: • Resident parking zones, the prices of which are based on the socio-economic factors of the district.
The fees for large, heavy cars should be higher, • Parking regulations that provide significantly fewer parking spaces per residential unit, but instead provide bicycle parking spaces and car-sharing offers.
Especially in social housing, significantly fewer parking spaces are required.
This can save on construction costs and reduce land consumption, • the expansion of school streets, which are completely closed to car traffic to enable safe travel for school children.
Push back car traffic Make mobility possible without a car Public space belongs to everyone, but is still heavily dominated by car traffic.
Streets, parking spaces and parking garages are very expensive.
In addition, cars pollute the environment with exhaust fumes, noise and CO₂ Where cars are indispensable, they should be as light, electric and made of fair produced materials as possible.
Especially problematic are large SUVs and heavy vehicles: they cause higher CO2 emissions, pose a greater danger in road traffic and overlook pedestrians, cyclists, especially children, more easily.
In addition, accidents with them lead to more serious injuries.
Such vehicles have no place in our cities.
Traffic and mobility justice• More frequent inspection of emergency routes.
The parking situation, especially in residential areas, often leads to emergency routes being blocked.
This can be life-threatening in emergencies and is therefore not a tolerable state.
• Park and Ride offers must not only be additional parking space.
For every parking space that is created or has been created outside as Park and Ride, a parking space in the inner city area must be removed.
Park and Ride must not serve to expand parking space overall, but must effectively park outside.
• No construction of neighborhood garages.
The term "neighbourhood garage" is merely a hip word for a car park.
We reject the construction of car parks, because they are expensive, not well received and not part of the transportation system.
More disabled parking spaces.
For people with disabilities, the car is the only way to be mobile due to the poor barrier-free development of public transport.
We demand more disabled parking spaces and their own access routes.
They must also be accessible and allow barrier-free access to the surrounding public facilities.
• The use of parking spaces.
We want areas that are currently used as car parks to be made accessible to everyone: as green or play areas, with seating or, in the case of larger areas, through densification for residential construction.
• Traffic calming through structural measures.
In many areas of Dortmund, the traffic rules are not adhered to.
In particular, speeding occurs in 30 zones.
We want slow driving to be built in: through speed bumps that cyclists can ride over and through narrow entrances with bollards.
Little has changed since the last report on the social situation in 2018 – and that despite the fact that the situation for many people in Dortmund has become worse.
Almost every fifth person in Dortmund is still threatened by poverty, and the saying still applies: "Tell me where you live and I'll tell you what opportunities you have." In addition, "if you are disabled, old or chronically ill, you are often faced with insurmountable barriers." Social disadvantage, poverty and exclusion have been a sad reality in Dortmund for many years.
A walk through the city center or various city districts shows a clear picture: people collecting bottles, begging or standing in long lines at the tables.
The official action plan "Social City" which was originally intended to improve living conditions in 13 particularly affected city districts threatened by poverty, unemployment and social exclusion, has hardly relieved these social spaces.
The plan is chronically underfunded and relies mainly on unpaid, voluntary commitment from citizens A solidary urban society ensures that everyone can participate in public life – and not only those who can afford it.
It is measured by how it treats those with the fewest resources.
For the Left, a social city of Dortmund creates and secures good jobs, fights poverty and exclusion and systematically removes barriers.
It provides demand-oriented, barrier-free and inclusive social facilities for all generations – for a life in dignity and with the possibility of social participation.
Poverty has many faces.
The worst of them are hunger, homelessness, social exclusion, discrimination and drug addiction.
The increasing poverty shows a blatant failure of politics.
Poverty is not a crime – and yet in Dortmund, as in many other cities, people affected by poverty and the homeless are harassed, displaced and criminalized by law enforcement, police and administration.
Instead of combating the social causes of poverty, visible poverty is driven out of the cityscape.
However, all people, regardless of their background or their life situation, have a right to public spaces and respectful treatment.
The Left Dortmund therefore demands an end This includes the fact that driving without a ticket is no longer prosecuted.
The prosecution mainly affects people who simply cannot afford tickets.
In the long term, the Left is fighting for free public transport for all, at least for people with low incomes, children and young people, schoolchildren, trainees and students.
We demand the change of the repressive Dortmund Allgemeinverfügung, which punishes "camping and aggressive begging".
These regulations specifically affect the weakest in our city and contradict the right to stay in public spaces.
Begging ban zones are incompatible with human rights and the Basic Law and must be abolished.
The Ordnungsamt may also no longer expel legally begging people - unlawful and degrading measures must be stopped immediately.
In addition, the Left is against the establishment of a "wake-up service" that drives homeless people out of the inner city early in the morning.
Public spaces belong to everyone, and instead of a wake-up service, more low-threshold overnight accommodation and shelter offers are needed.
The Left also demands a critical review of the tasks and orientation of the Ordnungsamt.
The focus must be shifted away from repressive measures against poor and homeless people and towards social support, prevention and respect.
Another important point is the fees for replacement documents.
Copies of identity documents in the event of loss must be free of charge for homeless and penniless people.
No one should be denied access to urgently needed identity documents or a replacement because of a lack of financial resources.
The city must take social responsibility and remove bureaucratic and financial hurdles.
Poverty is not combated with bans, fines or expulsions.
A solidarity and social city is also reflected in its public space.
In Dortmund, there are still many areas that are designed in such a way that they specifically exclude people affected by poverty, homeless people and vulnerable people, instead of offering them protection, places to stay and dignity.
The Left therefore demands consistent improvements for a humane infrastructure that benefits everyone.
We are fighting for the immediate removal of anti-homeless architecture – for example benches with curved seats that make it impossible to lie down, or devices that deliberately make it difficult to stay in public spaces.
No new items of this kind should be purchased To support people in acute emergency situations, we demand the establishment of a municipal cold bus, which will drive through the city at night in winter to find homeless people, provide them with warm drinks, clothing and blankets on site and take them to emergency shelters if necessary.
In summer, this bus should also be on the road in case of extreme heat, offering water, sun protection and help.
In addition, Die Linke Dortmund is campaigning for more public spaces, covered seating areas and places to stay – places that are open to everyone and offer protection from cold, heat or rain, without the obligation to consume or surveillance.
A social city is there for everyone.
Die Linke makes it clear that it is not the task of food banks, soup kitchens and social supermarkets to combat unemployment and poverty.
Although we support these initiatives and appreciate their commitment as valuable emergency aid, what is primarily required is a consistent municipal employment promotion policy and political decisions to combat hunger and homelessness.
Another important step is the improvement of the Dortmund Card.
This should, among other things, enable all children and young people under 18 years of age permanent This plan is intended to include direct measures that represent a type of municipal emergency aid as well as structural changes.
A social life in Dortmund Page 40 The Left demands: • Perspectiveless and poverty-promoting “Ein-Euro-Jobs”, combined wage positions as well as precarious employment in all forms must be ended.
Instead, unlimited, tariff-bound and socially insured positions must be created, which make ongoing citizen benefits superfluous.
• The job centers and social welfare offices must fully cover the housing costs in principle.
This is intended to prevent “forced relocations”.
• The city of Dortmund should create a report on the social situation in Dortmund every five years, so that comparatively up-to-date figures on poverty and living conditions in Dortmund are available.
• The Dortmund Card (formerly DoPass) should be expanded to a comprehensive social pass and automatically sent out when corresponding benefits are received.
It is important that offers can be taken up as uncomplicatedly as possible.
A social life in Dortmund Page 41 → This includes all important social benefits and offers being presented by employees of the In addition, they should set up a hardship fund that covers the costs of those affected in a socially acceptable way.
• Publicly funded advice centres in the fields of unemployment centres, debt counselling, AIDS support, outpatient addiction treatment and pregnancy counselling centres, as well as advice centres for refugees, should be maintained and expanded.
• The Consumer Centre in Dortmund should be equipped with sufficient staff.
Accommodation for people without accommodation Many people find themselves in precarious living situations due to poverty, unemployment, mental illness or family problems.
They are threatened with homelessness or are already homeless.
The city of Dortmund urgently needs to take comprehensive measures to help those affected and to ensure permanent housing in a safe and stable environment.
The Left therefore demands the expansion of the Housing First concept, which provides homeless people with their own accommodation without prior conditions such as the completion of social or rehabilitation measures.
In addition, the housing reserve programme must be further expanded, as there are simply not enough apartments in Dortmund to meet demand.
It is particularly important to provide smaller apart In addition, we demand better equipment of the “training homes”, which are supposed to support people on their way back into society.
These homes must offer more than just a “storage” of the residents – they must be oriented towards a life worthy of human beings, contain a correspondingly appropriate equipment and of course be mold-free.
In addition, the Left demands that forced evictions only take place in exceptional cases and exclusively under the condition that affected people are directly referred to a new home.
Rent arrears may not be the reason for a forced eviction.
Finally, the Left demands that power and gas cut-offs are not carried out in principle, as this is a measure that is unworthy of human beings and puts those affected in their difficult situation under additional strain.
Combating Homelessness Homelessness is a growing social problem that affects more and more people in Dortmund.
This situation is not just an individual fate, but an expression of profound structural deficits in social security and housing policy.
Affected people need more than short-term emergency aid – they need sustainable prospects for a life worthy of human beings.
It is a central task Funds for the accommodation of the homeless and socially disadvantaged must not be diverted by such arrangements.
To prevent such involvement, Die Linke is calling for all emergency accommodation to be transferred to municipal ownership in the medium to long term.
This will ensure that they are designed in a humane way and are accessible to all people.
Access must be unbureaucratic, regardless of passport, place of residence or residence permit.
Accommodation should be provided in lockable rooms that do not have to be shared.
In addition, these facilities must be regularly inspected by the city and civil society organizations.
A low-threshold, independent complaints management system must be created so that those affected can present their concerns without any obstacles.
Furthermore, the emergency sleeping places must remain open around the clock so that no one is forced to leave the accommodation in the morning.
In order to offer the affected people real help, more social workers must be employed in the facilities who provide both social and legal advice.
The city Drug addiction is a social problem: Die Linke is calling for the expansion of the drug consumption area at Grafenhof as well as the establishment of further easily accessible consumption In addition, we demand the expansion of drug counselling centres and the provision of care for drug-dependent homeless people.
This particularly vulnerable group needs publicly accessible toilets and showers at all times.
It is important that all affected and involved groups – drug users, residents, Dortmund must also pursue the binding goal of providing permanent accommodation for homeless people within two weeks, whether in a flat from the housing reserve programme or in a supported facility, depending on the needs of the affected person.
Another important aspect is the accessibility of emergency sleeping places.
These must be easily accessible by public transport.
In addition, access to taxi vouchers should be possible quickly and without red tape.
The prompt implementation of the container sleeping place project behind the main train station is urgently necessary, but should only be seen as a temporary solution until viable concepts for the permanent accommodation of homeless people have been developed and implemented.
Tackling drug addiction in solidarity A social life in Dortmund Page 44 Involving traders, Aidshilfe and other providers in dialogue and decision-making processes.
In Dortmund, diamorphine-based treatment is already established Drug addicts do not need further controls, but a system that shows them alternatives and is not a hindrance.
A social problem, not an individual one.
In Dortmund, people with disabilities and the chronically ill are still exposed to everyday barriers - not because of their physical condition, but because the city society and infrastructure make life unnecessarily difficult for them.
The UN Disability Convention has been in force since 2009, but many of its demands have not yet been implemented on the ground.
Public buildings, local transport and many places in public spaces are still not accessible.
The lack of accessible, public toilets is particularly glaring in Dortmund.
This is a decisive point for social participation and mobility in everyday life, especially for people with mobility impairments, the elderly or people with health restrictions.
The Left demands the consistent removal of these barriers and the expansion of barrier-free housing.
This includes the construction and modernization of barrier-free apartments as well as the expansion of barrier-free paths, places and stops.
Public local transport must be usable barrier-free throughout Dortmund, as well as municipal facilities.
An important step would The Left is also calling for the expansion of psychological and psychiatric counseling services for socially disadvantaged people in order to specifically treat mental illnesses that often accompany poverty and homelessness.
Comprehensive psychological care is necessary to support people in difficult situations and improve their quality of life.
Participation for all.
The construction of barrier-free, publicly accessible toilet facilities in all districts, parks and central locations.
Participation is a human right that belongs to everyone – regardless of disability, age or chronic illness.
Therefore, affected people and their interest groups should be systematically included in municipal decision-making processes.
The Left is committed to an inclusive Dortmund that does not exclude anyone and enables self-determined living for all.
For self-determined mobility, a fully barrier-free public transport system is needed.
As long as this is not achieved, additional customer advisors should also be deployed in U- and streetcars.
The disabled transport service must be expanded and freed from restrictions.
Guidance systems for blind and visually impaired people in public spaces must be expanded and maintained.
In order to ensure participation in Information and emergency services as well as voting procedures must be designed to be barrier-free and understandable.
Administrative documents should also be available in easy or simple language, in multiple languages and in Braille.
The Left is also committed to the increased use of sign language interpreters at public events and to comprehensive training for municipal employees to raise awareness in dealing with people with disabilities.
Inclusion as social and professional participation The Left is committed to the inclusion of people with disabilities in all areas of life in Dortmund – also in the labor market.
The further development of effective support measures for the integration or reintegration into the primary labor market is a central task of the city as well as its municipal institutions and associations.
This also includes support in the job search, which must be more strongly supported.
Workshops are exploitative enterprises.
We demand their complete abolition.
The Left demands that a disability not restrict political participation.
Accordingly, elections must be able to be carried out barrier-free.
Polling stations must be selected or adapted accordingly and equipped for the election (for example, with ballot papers for visually impaired people).
Some disabilities also manifest themselves through increased sensitivity to sensory overload.
Therefore, it must be examined whether so-called “quiet hours” can be established in the polling stations on election days.
It is also important for political participation that the meetings of local committees and the meeting documents are designed to be barrier-free, if necessary with sign language interpreters.
Similarly to the development of plans for the implementation of the Istanbul Convention or the promotion of sexual and gender diversity, Die Linke demands that an action plan for better inclusion be developed.
This should work out measures in broad association with those affected, with which the city administration can make its offers and structures more inclusive and at the same time give impetus in the private sector to create better conditions for inclusion.
Die Linke is committed to broad participation in public campaigns to strengthen the position of people with disabilities in society and to protect their dignity.
For an accessible and easy overview for those affected, Die Linke proposes the creation of a city map – with a list of On the basis of this review, companies should commit to designing 10% of the residential units in new construction and renovation projects to be barrier-free where it makes sense.
The goal must be to increase the proportion of affordable and barrier-free housing in the Dortmund urban area to 15%.
In order to enable independent living in one's own home or house, a consultation system for senior citizens and people with disabilities should be established that examines and, if necessary, also promotes structural measures.
The Left demands that the city administration check all municipal buildings for barrier-free access and present plans and measures to convert buildings to be barrier-free within the period of the council 2025-2030.
According to the plans, Dortmund should commit to renovating at least 15% of the affected buildings to be barrier-free on average each year.
Public buildings and cultural institutions must be equipped with hearing systems and visual signals in elevators.
In addition, the expansion of guidance systems for blind and visually impaired people must be promoted throughout the public space.
The Left is committed to an offensive for retrofitting public transport: By The health sector is one of the largest employers in the region.
However, there is still a glaring shortage of skilled workers in the field of nursing and geriatric care.
The Left is calling for a qualification offensive to train nursing staff from all clinics and care and nursing homes in public ownership in Dortmund, and for a significant improvement in working conditions.
To this end, the Left believes that it is necessary to improve occupational safety through regular risk assessments and measures based on these.
Only in this way can the current nursing shortage be sustainably combated.
Changes to hospital care through the Hospital Reform 2025 will come into force.
The Hospital Reform aims to strengthen large clinics – so-called “maximum care providers” – and to centralise services.
This will involve reducing the number of hospitals.
This will be accompanied by a restructuring of operating income.
Hospitals will now receive retention allowances, which will be combined with reduced case allowances.
We are against the closure of individual wards for economic reasons.
Instead, we want good care throughout Dortmund: The Left is fighting for comprehensive and A social life in Dortmund Page 49 A social life in DortmundAll medical areas are covered.
We stand behind the city's clinic and the children's clinic.
As long as the state does not provide sufficient funds for investments, especially for the children's clinic, we see it as a municipal task to provide the financial resources to ensure good care.
In addition, we want to integrate the occupational health service into the Dortmund clinic in order to simplify processes and create economic advantages.
The Left demands the securing of jobs in Dortmund's hospitals.
The reform must not be at the expense of the employees.
At the same time, the comprehensive coverage of all citizens must be maintained.
Good care with doctors We want more doctors for Dortmund.
Especially in the field of pediatricians, there is a glaring under-supply.
The situation is so serious that insured children sometimes have to be treated in the consultation hours for the uninsured because they cannot get a regular appointment in a practice.
Even vaccinations are delayed due to the lack of vaccines.
This affects the residents of child-rich city districts such as Nordstadt or Scharnhorst in particular.
Unfortunately, the municipal influence on medical care is limited, as the Kassenärztliche Vereinigung decides on the number of places.
Nevertheless, we see it as a central task to advocate for more pediatricians in Nordstadt in particular.
A similarly worrying picture is emerging in the area of psychotherapeutic care.
The entire Ruhr area is significantly under-supplied.
That is why we want to use the LWL to ensure that the inpatient places at the Dortmund Clinic for Psychiatry are expanded and more open offers are created.
The Left is calling for the expansion of health kiosks in Dortmund.
We welcome the establishment of the health kiosk in Nordstadt.
Interpreters are also to be included there in order to overcome language barriers and improve intercultural communication.
We want to create additional offers, for example for prevention and vaccinations, and at the same time prevent non-medical offers from leading to a three-class medicine.
The establishment of health kiosks is not to be understood as a substitute for good care with practices.
Based on the fact that in a few years 25% of the total population in Germany will require age-related care and support in everyday life, the municipalities are facing major challenges that must be addressed now – there can be no more “business as usual”.
Whether in the city or in the country, whether ambulatory or stationary: all offers must be designed in such a way that the person in need of care and/ or support can remain in their local area and not be torn out of their social environment.
The Left rejects the centralization of stationary care facilities.
Humane care and support The Left demands: • The full inclusion of the previous additional staff for the care of dementia sufferers in the new staffing plan.
• Good accessibility of stationary care facilities, for young and old, close to home and connected to public transport.
• An expansion of the demand-oriented, ambulant and stationary palliative care.
• The development of culturally sensitive care concepts and greater consideration of these concepts in training.
• The re-municipalization in the event of a A social life in Dortmund: Home care in public hands Home care or home nursing is a privately run, profit-oriented instrument of nursing and nursing care in the living environment of people in need of care.
In general, it is the case that, insofar as the municipality can delegate its responsibilities to free service providers, Die Linke is in favour of these responsibilities only being permanently assigned to free service providers if the latter guarantee the same employment law standards as for employees of the municipality.
This also applies to works council participation, i.e.
the collective bargaining standards.
The demand also applies to religious service providers.
If free service providers do not meet these requirements, the municipal service providers should take over their responsibilities.
Short-term care facilities If care for people in need of care cannot be guaranteed at home for a certain period of time, professional short-term care offers an opportunity to take up stationary care.
In many cases, relatives take on the nursing care – often beyond their limits.
If the carers fall ill or need relief, the person in need of care requires a place in short-term care, and this should be The city treasurer, who is also the cultural commissioner, is responsible for this.
Nevertheless, many of the actors and actresses at the Schauspielhaus and the other departments only have annual contracts.
Currently, the actors and actresses are looking at the year 2026 with great uncertainty.
From April, the theatre will have to move to temporary stages because of the renovation.
We therefore demand that rehearsal rooms be provided quickly and that the actors and actresses, as well as all other employees, be guaranteed to keep their jobs.
We, as the Left Fraction, voted in favour of the construction of the children's theatre ("Junge Bühne") because almost all schools and children in Dortmund visit the theatre - regardless of their social background.
The theatre is therefore also an educational institution in this sense.
However, we are also concerned with the free art scene and demand sufficient funding.
Artists often live in precarious circumstances and are 90% supplementary beneficiaries at the job centre.
Especially when their art is not just decorative, but political.
Often artists are awarded prizes - without this significantly improving their situation.
That is why we, together with the scene and the cultural office, have taken the initiative to improve the social situation of artists.
The Left Party in the Council has, at the end of 2024, provided 200,000 euros for the free scene with a budget decision.
But that is not enough.
We will continue to fight for artists - at least in Dortmund - to receive a standard and existentially secure financing.
Many of them now receive a subsidy for studio rent.
The Left Party has also provided funds for cultural centers such as Dings e.V., Welthaus, Taranta Babu and others.
The Left Party demands that live events by non-commercial providers are also supported, as they make an important contribution to cultural life in Dortmund - an example is "Bierschinken".
We would be happy to also support initiatives for other music genres.
A social life in DortmundMuseums The Left Party supports the work of the museums in making collections accessible and experienceable and in promoting the exchange of these collections with other institutions.
Of particular importance to us in this context is the preservation and further development of the industrial culture facilities – a prominent example of which is the Hoesch Museum.
In the case of the museums, Die Linke is calling above all for adequate staffing for the Mondo Mio children’s museum in the Westfalenpark.
It is intensively used by schools and children’s groups and is an enrichment for Dortmund.
We have already campaigned in the past for adequate staffing, but without the necessary success.
Action must finally be taken here.
A particular concern of ours as anti-fascists is also the Steinwache memorial site.
The upcoming new construction and renovation of the exhibition requires committed participation in the content and design concept.
The aim must be to keep the warning against right-wing radicalism alive.
The Steinwache is of great importance for anti-fascist educational work in Dortmund, especially as there are fewer and fewer eyewitnesses to the fascist terror available.
With the votes of the Left faction, the extension building, which is primarily intended for educational work, was approved.
They also offer space for communal experiences and a social life in Dortmund.
These are linked to existing concepts for youth and child development.
As this was one of our demands, we agree with the current modalities.
We are fighting for the promotion of girls in team sports and for the promotion of queer sports groups.
There is still a lack of sports halls that are barrier-free and therefore accessible to people with disabilities, even though this should already be standard in new buildings.
We must therefore work harder to renovate older halls and sports facilities.
The swimming pools in Dortmund are a bigger problem.
A large part of the pools were privatized years ago.
The Left is still calling for re-nationalization, because according to experts, it is hardly possible to run swimming pools profitably.
Many of them are so dilapidated that it will lead to the closure of both indoor and outdoor pools.
In particular, the closure of indoor swimming pools is a disaster for school swimming.
The closure of the Nordbad not only affects the many schoolchildren in the district, but also the remaining residents.
The decision not to renovate the Nordbad, but to look for a new location, was a mistake and must be reversed.
A new, suitable location is still uncertain and would in any case be less central.
In addition, a new building would take significantly more time than renovation and would promote social togetherness.
Organised sport in particular does valuable educational work, creates low-threshold opportunities for social participation and thus contributes, among other things, to the successful integration of migrants.
For Die Linke, broad, children's and youth sport have priority.
The city of Dortmund is responsible for maintaining and improving the infrastructure in this area.
Particular attention must be paid to ensuring that people with disabilities can also use this infrastructure.
Die Linke promotes the access of sports clubs to extra-curricular commitment opportunities at open comprehensive schools.
For this, the sports clubs require more trained staff.
We support the organisers of this qualification work, such as the StadtSportBund Dortmund e.
V.
- Top-level sport as an expression of an individual and free life or career decision is also something we support.
It is important not to neglect the provision of barrier-free access to top-level sport for people with disabilities.
The Dortmund leisure sports scene and club funding are generally well organised.
In the area of team sports, especially football, there are established funding opportunities and a fair share of social life in Dortmund.
Therefore, the renovation should be started immediately and another location should be sought for an additional indoor pool.
We support the Nordbad and want to maintain the location.
After all, the Stock - heide open-air pool is being restored in an authentic manner – this is also a merit of the Left, since we pointed out that the pool is under monument protection.
Nevertheless, this pool will not open until 2026 at the earliest.
The Hardenberg open-air pool is no longer usable for safety reasons and will remain closed in 2025.
The Left has been calling for free admission for Dortmund children and young people in open-air pools during the summer holidays for years.
This will probably only be realized in re-municipalized pools.
In the dilapidated, i.e.
In Dortmund, around 120,000 senior citizens live, and old-age poverty is increasingly becoming a pressing problem.
Almost every second statutory retirement pension is below 1,000 euros gross, and 7.4% of pensioners (12,980) are dependent on social benefits, and the trend is rising.
Senior citizens with a migration or refugee background are particularly affected by this, as they are confronted with additional hurdles due to In addition, many baths are run by the Sportwelt.
The Sportwelt has hardly any employees, as they are paid below the minimum wage.
That is why we are not only calling for re-municipalisation, but also for employees to be paid according to the collective agreement.
We are also calling for free admission to other leisure facilities, such as the Westfalenpark.
It is particularly important to us that young people under 18 in Dortmund continue to have free access to these facilities during the holidays.
We also want to create attractive and free play and sports offers during this time.
For the zoo, we are calling for affordable family offers with integrated public transport offers.
The Left is calling for a minimum pension of 1,400 euros net to effectively combat poverty in old age.
In addition, the city of Dortmund should actively promote alternative forms of housing, such as senior citizens' WGs and multi-generational houses.
These projects offer older people, especially women, the opportunity to live independently and in a community.
In particular, senior citizens with a migration background are to be better integrated into society through targeted language courses and integration programs.
These measures are intended to make it easier to access social and care services and to ensure their participation in social life.
Another central concern of the Left is the expansion of support for caring relatives.
This includes not only relief services but also nursing care subsidies and the promotion of specialized counseling centers that provide comprehensive support to relatives.
Dependency on care still represents a risk of poverty, which is why the Left is calling for significantly better staffing and funding of elderly care.
This includes the mandatory employment of skilled staff at collective bargaining wages and regular quality controls in care facilities and home care.
In addition, care support centers and senior citizen offices are to be further expanded in all districts to ensure comprehensive support for care-dependent people and their relatives in their local area.
The Left is also calling for the introduction of social support for senior citizens who are particularly affected by poverty in old age.
This could be achieved through specific support offers or community cafes.
The demographic change requires a change in awareness in the handling of municipal senior citizen The city's senior policy must be given a much higher priority in political life and not be limited to the provision of care and subsidies for old people's homes.
It is about enabling senior citizens to participate fully in society and culture and creating the conditions to bring their potential and life experiences into society.
It is also about counteracting the widespread loneliness.
Senior policy is a cross-sectional task.
It must make it easier for older people to access new technical possibilities for coping with everyday life, while at the same time ensuring that all public offers remain accessible without digital hurdles.
In all areas of policy, the following points must be taken into account: Promotion of participation Creation of platforms in which senior citizens are actively involved in the planning and decision-making processes of communal projects.
This includes regular citizen forums and workshops.
The mobility of senior citizens plays a decisive role in their quality of life and participation in social life.
Digitalisation can offer important opportunities to support the mobility of older people, especially those with health problems or other restrictions.
Through the use of digital technologies such as virtual doctor visits, online platforms for social interaction and special apps In addition, digital solutions such as exercise programmes, virtual training opportunities and fall prevention technologies can help pensioners to maintain and improve their physical mobility.
Strengthening networks The establishment of network offices in every municipality is necessary, which will strengthen cooperation between social institutions, self-help groups and voluntary helpers.
In Dortmund, twelve senior citizens' offices, run by the city and the associations of the Free Welfare Service, already offer the opportunity to obtain information on all issues surrounding ageing in all districts of the city.
These offices should in future increasingly build and support networks in their catchment areas, which are specifically targeted at certain target groups and problems.
There is also the possibility of creating contact points for "competence networks on loneliness", which deal with the causes and consequences of loneliness and promote the development and exchange of possible prevention and intervention measures.
Access to cultural and social programmes, which make it easier for older people to access cultural and social activities, for example through free or reduced admission prices and special arrangements.
Barrier-free infrastructure Improvement of the building infrastructure to make public spaces, means of transport and buildings barrier-free, so Development of offers that are tailored specifically to the interests and needs of older people from different cultural backgrounds.
A focus should be placed on digital qualification.
The fundamental right to an analogue life remains unaffected.
Promotion of voluntary work through training, financial incentives and recognition programmes, in order to give senior citizens the opportunity to actively participate in the community.
Intergenerational exchange Initiatives to promote dialogue and cooperation between young and old, for example through joint projects, events or mentoring.
Social advice and support Expansion of advice centres that provide comprehensive advice and support to senior citizens in matters of social security, health care and financial support.
These measures should aim at an inclusive, just and solidary society that recognises and promotes the potential of older people.
Protection and promotion of children and young people Day care and daytime care for children Despite the legal entitlement to a place in day care for children from the age of one that has existed since 2013, reliable, good full-day care places in day care centres are still in short supply.
On 01.01.2024 there were 34.5% U3 and The Left clearly states: The child's legal entitlement to day care applies regardless of the parents' employment status.
Therefore, we demand enough day care places to be able to meet this legal entitlement.
The Left demands for day care centres: • Publicly funded, local day care centres that are well equipped and available to all children whose parents wish to use them.
• The expansion of day care places to meet demand, with a group size of a maximum of 15 children and a caregiver-to-child ratio of one caregiver per five children.
• The profession of childcare worker must become more attractive.
It is important that this important job is paid fairly.
There should be no wage dumping.
• New day care centres should be built by municipal building companies rather than private investors, to whom no land should be sold.
Expensive lease agreements with investors should not be entered into.
• Inclusive day care centres, in which the provision of multi-professional teams of therapists is ensured in the long term.
• The establishment of a day care health service, in which specialists support children with health problems and initiate preventive measures • An extension of these commercial kitchens to all existing municipal day care centres.
Catering must be a justified exception.
The Left demands for day care: • The raising of qualification standards in day care as well as the binding use of specialists in large day care centres, • The significant expansion of the qualification of day care parents and the improvement of the professional support of day care parents by the youth office and local providers, • The existence-saving remuneration of day care parents.
Protection and promotion of children and young people Page 64 Rights of children and young people Children and young people also have rights.
First and foremost, these are intended to protect them from abuse, exploitation and violence.
However, they also have the right to participation and education, and – as formulated in the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child – quite simply to life, survival and development.
The Left demands: • The special promotion of children’s and youth facilities.
Self-managed spaces (alternative and youth centres) should be strengthened.
Appropriate facilities should receive sufficient personnel and material resources with more structural and less project funding.
• A special promotion of bar This also includes open spaces as relaxed meeting points for young people.
• Additional capacity for the maintenance of these spaces, so that they remain usable.
• The use of sports grounds, halls and swimming pools must be possible regardless of membership of a club.
Municipal swimming pools with low entrance fees or free admission and free-to-use sports facilities must be maintained.
• The maintenance and expansion of free holiday activities and cost-effective holiday camps.
• The continued availability of assistance with upbringing, particularly preventive offers such as counselling for children and young people, and the continued availability of target group-specific information for children, young people and families on all assistance and counselling offers.
Protection and support for children and young people Page 65 The Left demands for Early Help and Baby Welcome Services: • The strengthening of the staffing of family offices as low-threshold contact points in the district, • the expansion of the baby lottery services in all Dortmund maternity clinics as an early point of support for families, • safe school routes, sufficient traffic calming measures and child-friendly neighbourhood development, • an improvement in the staffing Protection and promotion of children and young people Page 67 Good education for all and language promotion Protection and promotion of children and young peopleEducation is a human right that every child is entitled to, regardless of the social status and income of their parents.
Current education policy contributes significantly to social problems such as limited opportunities in the job market and low incomes.
Education is decisive for integration, cultural participation and the perception of political rights.
Therefore, education policy must focus more on promoting media competence and political education in order to counteract disinformation, social division and polarisation.
In Dortmund, social division is particularly evident in the educational gap between affluent and poor neighbourhoods.
The chances of achieving a high level of education and therefore of obtaining well-paid jobs are distributed extremely unequally.
The school projects supported by the Left, such as “Learning to think differently” in Nordstadt and the KinderCampus schools in other neighbourhoods, must therefore be preserved and, if possible, expanded.
The Left demands: • Equal, high-quality education for all children, regardless of the income and background of their parents, • the renovation of schools and investment in the construction Protection and promotion of children and young people The schools of the city of Dortmund must be places that keep learners and teachers healthy in the long term and encourage learning and a good community.
The school authority is responsible for the construction, maintenance and upkeep of school buildings, including their expansion.
The Left demands: • all existing buildings must be maintained in such a way that school operations are not interrupted by sudden closures • any pollution by toxins, mold or hygiene deficiencies must be eliminated as quickly as possible, • the neglected topic of room acoustics in classrooms must be pioneeringly addressed with simple measures, • the effects of the upcoming heat summers on the teaching rooms in buildings from previous decades must be effectively and sensibly limited in terms of energy, • asphalt schoolyards must be transformed into green islands in order to avoid heat accumulation and to increase the value of play and stay, • particularly expensive teaching materials, such as individual experiments in the natural sciences or materials in the class set, must be available centrally to all schools from the city and delivered without the involvement of the teachers.
The city of Dortmund should also encourage the various school We also demand the further construction and new construction of comprehensive schools at the municipal level, as well as participation in school experiments for longer joint learning.
This demonstrably improves educational justice and reduces the influence of social background.
The Left favors schools that lead to more educational justice: This is of course the comprehensive school as a place of joint learning, as well as the Primus school, which is currently still running as a model experiment.
There it is possible for students to learn together from class 1 to 13 without having to change schools.
Protection and promotion of children and young people Page 72 The Left demands: • Framework agreements that obligate the providers of OGS to work contracts with tariff-bound, socially insured employment of the care staff, • a comprehensive school system in all primary and secondary schools, • the expansion of OGS with qualified pedagogical care including remedial education for children with support needs, • free of charge after-school care including a high-quality school meal.
The Left demands: • A new building and a suitable interim solution immediately until completion.
The implementation of OGS is regulated via framework agreements of the youth office with This includes the coexistence of people in different life situations and with different lifestyles.
A livable community is based on respect - respect for diverse life concepts and opinions.
Fascist and right-wing populist organizations pursue the exact opposite and rely on exclusion.
Right-wing propaganda tries to make refugees, migrants and minorities responsible for poverty and social problems.
Poverty and precarious living conditions are widespread in Dortmund and must be combated in the sense of social justice.
Only in this way can fascist and racist arguments be deprived of their breeding ground.
In recent years, the right-wing scene in NRW has changed.
In the municipal elections in 2014, the NPD and the Pro-movements were still represented in the right-wing spectrum, while in individual cities the newly founded party "The Right" and the AfD ran for the first time.
Right-wing extremists were able to win individual municipal mandates, and the AfD entered many municipal parliaments, sometimes even in group strength.
At the same time, there was a social polarization: racist statements are made more frequently in public, and many people turn to right At the same time, more and more people are standing up against the right and for social improvements.
The right-wing scene is a daily threat to many people in the municipalities.
Neo-fascists and right-wing populists are still present in municipal representations, including in Dortmund.
It is an unbearable burden that they can spread their human-hating ideology through these mandates.
Neo-fascism has a long tradition in Dortmund: in the 1980s the “Borussenfront”, in the 1990s the militant Nazi skinhead fraternities, and until 2012 the so-called “Autonomous Nationalists”.
After their organization was banned by the State Minister of the Interior, they continue under the guise of the party privilege as “The Right”, now as “Homeland”.
A Solidary Society Page 75 We clearly reject the extremism theory (“Horseshoe Theory”) that places antifascists and the left on the same level as Nazis and racists under the combative term “left-wing extremism”, thereby criminalizing anti-fascist engagement On the contrary: they try to prevent the common resistance of people of different origins against social cuts and the destruction of jobs by their racist division.
The attack by Nazis on the Dortmund town hall on election night in 2014 made it clear that the extreme right uses violence.
The party “Heimat” (formerly “Die Rechte”) pursues a clearly national socialist course in its program.
The Left advocates for consistently linking the fight against racism and neo-Nazis with social demands – because only through social justice can the breeding ground for fascist ideologies be taken away.
Since the state has repeatedly failed in the fight against right-wing structures, as the NSU scandal and the repeated police violence against anti-fascists show, we support the concept of civil society resistance.
This includes counter-demonstrations and peaceful, but determined blockades – side by side with young people, workers, the unemployed, pensioners, LGBTIQ activists of different origins.
The Left demands: • Courts, police and administration must use all legal means to suppress neo-fascist activities, and do so with innovation Five people have been murdered by Nazis in Dortmund since 2001.
There is a likely connection between the Dortmund Nazi scene and the terrorist group “National Socialist Underground” (NSU).
The NSU has killed numerous people in Germany in cold blood – including Mehmet Kubaşık, a Dortmund citizen.
The Left will use its function in municipal committees to publicly name police violence against anti-fascists as well as any form of state support for racists, neo-Nazis and racist politics (for example against asylum seekers).
Our commitment does not end at the parliamentary level.
We will also continue to support resistance against right-wing structures on the street, in companies and in schools.
The Dortmund Steinwache, once the headquarters of the NS-Sonderpolizei Gestapo, is today a memorial to the crimes of the national socialist terror regime.
The Left welcomes the planned physical expansion of this memorial to better fulfil the important tasks of remembrance work.
Together with memorial sites in the Bittermark, the Rombergpark and on the International Cemetery, the Steinw Further stumbling stones should also keep the memory alive and bring the victims out of anonymity.
Stumbling stones, like other memorial sites, should be protected from right-wing marches.
The Left is committed to renaming streets and squares that still bear the names of supporters of German fascism or of racists, antisemites and militarists.
The Left has long been calling for the banning of the terrorist group Combat 18 in Germany.
Canada has already put the German section of Combat 18 on the anti-terror list.
The Left explicitly welcomes the recent banning of the group in Germany.
The Left is not unaware that right-wing populist attitudes extend far into the social mainstream.
This is also demonstrated by the support for anti-European, nationalist parties like the AfD.
A comprehensive debate on right-wing ideology in all its forms is therefore necessary.
In this context, the Left clearly distinguishes between the voters of such parties and their organised members.
We note with regret that the federal government has drastically cut funding for exit programmes for right-wing extremism.
As the Left, we are calling for the “Exit” programme in the greater Dortmund area to be continued and for its funding to be secured through public funds from the state and the commune.
We are fighting against racist and neo-fascist hate on all levels, together with the citizens: at demonstrations, in anti-fascist social alliances, in youth and cultural alliances.
The Left is committed to dialogue with migrants in order to reduce mutual fears and prejudices and to enable a solidaristic and peaceful coexistence.
The Left is just as determined to oppose fascists and right-wing movements from the migrant spectrum as it is to oppose other right-wing forces.
The municipal administration should also be guided by these principles.
The departments of public order, youth and health, and the entire municipal administration bear political responsibility and must actively participate in shaping a liveable commune for all people – regardless of their origin or way of life.
Therefore, the Left is calling for the employees of the public administration to be sensitised A solidarity societyThe Left Party considers the Backup victim support centre to be indispensable.
In view of the ever-increasing range of tasks in the counselling of victims of right-wing violence or threats, the counselling centre must be equipped with additional staff.
In view of the increasing anti-Semitism, we as the Left Party declare our solidarity with Jewish fellow citizens of our city.
It is shameful that Jewish institutions have to be protected 80 years after the Holocaust, and that Jewish fellow citizens are made responsible by some parts of the population for the Israeli government, which is certainly open to criticism.
The AfD is a clearly fascist party.
In the Dortmund City Council, the AfD faction is repeatedly falling through long speeches that are racist and often on the border of incitement, as well as through deliberate disruption of the parliamentary process.
As the Left, we clearly oppose this behaviour.
At the beginning of the last legislative period, the Left faction organised a joint voting behaviour of the Council that denied the AfD access to the important external committees.
This is lived anti-fascism.
The Against all forms of anti-Semitism!
We are the firewall!
Keep the AfD in check!
We will consistently reject their motions and ensure that their voting behaviour can never be the deciding factor for majorities.
We will remain in constant exchange with all other democratic groups and will vehemently demand the maintenance of the firewall in the next legislative period – if necessary, even on the streets and through extra-parliamentary protest.
Gender equality and queer life Despite formal gender equality, women and queer people are still exposed to numerous forms of discrimination.
Women still earn significantly less than men and do more unpaid care work.
They are confronted with prejudices, often hit a “glass ceiling” and are still underrepresented in leadership positions.
Structural disadvantages are still all-pervasive.
Politics must actively counteract these forms of discrimination and ensure that all people can develop freely.
Measures for a diverse lifestyle that also take into account queer lifestyles must be developed at the local level.
An end to the preference of marriage as the only recognized lifestyle is necessary – all family forms must be equally supported.
The Left demands the implementation of the Istanbul Convention at the local level.
A process for this has already been initiated by the Equal Opportunities Office.
The Left supports this and demands the increase of funds for further measures.
The Left is committed to the preservation and expansion of women’s shelters and safe havens for people affected by or threatened by violence.
Here, there is a need for more barrier-free protection spaces.
The prevention of domestic violence must be a central task of social institutions.
The Left demands targeted aid offers for women in social need, combined with the commitment to a minimum security and minimum income.
At the federal level, the Left is committed to a solidarity-based society, the legalization of abortion and the abolition of §218 StGB.
In Dortmund, it is necessary to increase the number of doctors who perform abortions and to strengthen non-church counseling centers.
The Left is committed to providing more support and assistance to sex workers who need to be protected from violence.
We support their self-organization.
There is misery prostitution in Dortmund, and we want to help the women affected by providing suitable offers that also take addiction disorders into account.
People without a residence permit who are affected by forced prostitution must not be afraid that their request for help will lead to deportation.
They must be especially protected.
The Left demands: • Special support for single parents.
Single parents are particularly affected by poverty due to the high care workload and the tax disadvantage compared to married couples.
Local politics must take specific measures to counteract this injustice.
Protection of mothers and children Violence against women is a structural problem that is deeply rooted in patriarchal power relations and affects millions of women worldwide – including in Dortmund.
Every third woman in Germany experiences physical or sexualized violence at least once in her life, and femicide, i.e.
the killing of women due to their gender The Left is calling for: • Full cost exemption for those seeking protection in women's shelters, • The construction of three additional women's shelters in Dortmund by 2027 to close the gap of 45 missing places of protection.
An inclusive concept for women with disabilities and for their children is to be implemented.
• Higher financial support for women's shelters in the city of Dortmund to ensure their long-term operation.
This includes not only the provision of accommodation, but also offers such as psychological counseling, legal advice and childcare.
• The provision of interpreters to support women who do not speak German adequately.
• A publicly effective campaign to raise awareness of violence against women and make available offers of help.
This includes the mandatory installation of emergency numbers and information about women's shelters in women's toilets in municipal buildings, schools and public facilities.
This measure is low-threshold and can save lives.
A solidarity society page 84 The Left is committed to promoting and maintaining women's and girls' projects.
Social projects must reduce social inequalities between the sexes.
The The images that surround us every day shape our thinking – and the public space that we all use together should not be used as a stage for discrimination.
The Left demands the possibility of childcare at all meetings of the city and district councils as well as the committees and solidarity with the queer community.
The Left criticizes the cuts in AIDS aid and the promotion of queer projects at the state level.
The financial support of AIDS aid in Dortmund is already secured, but the responsibility for financing these aid offers should continue to lie with the state.
Dortmund has a pioneering role in the area of queer offers, which should also be extended to neighboring communities.
The Left demands the implementation of the master plan developed to strengthen sexual and gender diversity, which should be better equipped financially where necessary.
We would like to build on the strong work of the advisory boards.
In addition, we demand the establishment of an equal opportunities committee, which ensures that all measures and initiatives are consistently geared towards equality.
The Left is committed to a minimum quota of 50% of people with the gender entries female, diverse or none in Thus, the independent planning of this protest and festival of the queer community is guaranteed.
A solidarity society Page 85 Immigration, human rights and solidarity The Left says: Germany is an immigration country.
In Dortmund, people from around 170 different states live.
Many different cultures, traditions and ways of life bring a colourful variety into our lives.
Migrants are particularly affected by social cutbacks and disadvantages: whether on the job market, income, citizens' rights, educational opportunities, cultural life or living conditions.
These social inequalities are clearly visible on a municipal level and are concentrated there.
In Dortmund, almost 35% of the people have a migration background, and the proportion is even much higher among children under six years old.
In addition to the "classic" migrants, since the EU enlargement, immigrants and refugees from war and crisis regions have joined.
For the most part, they have found their current home in the impoverished districts of Dortmund, where there is an above-average competition for living space and childcare places.
People with a migration background - new immigrants even more so than those who The city of Dortmund is striving for a solidarity-based society Page 86 The Left is calling for: • a municipal housing policy that actively prevents the creation of ghettos, • a comprehensive support programme for children with a migrant background in daycare centres and schools, and the provision of support and advice for parents with a migrant background, • an expansion of the number of daycare places, especially in the under-served, migrant-dominated districts of the city, especially in the Nordstadt district, • measures to promote intercultural competence in schools and daycare centres, • early language support, involving • protected spaces for women with a migrant background: many of them invest a lot of resources in care work due to their flight history and their understanding of their role, and put their own needs to one side.
There is a strong desire to speak good German, but the framework conditions are often complicated.
This starts with the fact that the times of educational measures often do not coincide with the childcare times.
Therefore, protected spaces are needed for women, in immigration, human rights and solidarity with commendable measures that can help to level out unequal starting • The hearing of the Integration Council in all political and administrative matters relating to the topic of integration • Cooperation with universities, schools, chambers of commerce and industry and local businesses to develop concepts for the recognition of school, university and vocational qualifications.
• The inclusion of people with a migration background in new appointments in the administration in line with the composition of the population.
• Support for sea rescue – in view of the large number of people fleeing war, poverty and criminalisation and who sometimes have to wait for days on rescue ships.
• The admission of more people in need in Germany and, in conjunction with this, a culture of welcome regardless of economic interests.
• The end of discrimination and exclusion, • The provision of decent living conditions for asylum seekers and those granted leave to remain, • A more generous and less restrictive approach to discretionary services in matters of residence law, • Better access to healthcare for asylum seekers and those granted leave to remain.
A society based on solidarity The Left will continue to oppose the “payment card” for refugees in communal refugee accommodation and will vote against it in the council.
• Thus, the value of advertising boards in the vicinity of schools should be maintained.
It is no coincidence that the Peace Column, which reminds us of "peace on earth", stands in front of the town hall on the Peace Square.
In this tradition, we also see the policy of the Left Party and we are merely putting the town partnership on hold.
At the same time, a new town partnership with the Ukrainian city of Shytomyr was established.
This means that Dortmund is well prepared to make a contribution to peace and international understanding after the end of the war.
In this sense, we want to actively develop these town partnerships.
The Bundeswehr should not be advertised as an employer and career opportunity.
The appropriate design of concession contracts must be taken into account.
The Left Party demands: • Establish and maintain international relations!
The Left Party demands: • No advertising for death!
A solidarity society Page 90 2019 the city council agreed to the ICAN Cities Appeal on the motion of the Left Party and thereby committed itself in an exemplary manner to a world free of nuclear weapons.
This declaration of intent can be given additional emphasis by disseminating the resolution and appropriate proactive peace-political public relations work.
The municipality ensures that the planning of civil-military cooperation is limited exclusively to defensive operations such as natural disasters.
Young people must be actively informed that they can object to the transfer of their data.
This gives them the opportunity to actively object to advertising and contact by the Bundeswehr at events such as the Easter March, the Day of Remembrance for the Dropping of the Atomic Bomb on Hiroshima and those days of remembrance that are connected with the criminal world wars.
We want to continue to give life to this resolution, especially in today's times.
Advertising appearances by the Bundeswehr at job fairs - insofar as they are under (co-)responsibility of the municipality - as well as at local festivals or municipal events must not be allowed.
The Left Party The Left demands that people who have fled from war zones to our commune are listened to and included as important eyewitnesses in the communal peace work.
We work with migrant self-organizations in solidarity projects for politically persecuted and/or victims of war and civil war.
When the devastating earthquake hit southern Turkey and northern Syria, our Left faction in the council succeeded in ensuring that, in addition to the predominantly social democratic regions of southern Turkey, the Kurdish autonomous region of Rojava was also supported with aid deliveries from Dortmund.
The Left says: We tolerate neither the glorification of violence nor the relativization of war crimes or violations of human rights.
Our position on human rights is clear: The Left always stands on the side of those whose human rights are being withheld.
The Left demands: • Dortmund’s city area is off limits for military use!
A solidarity society Page 93 Democracy and transparency The word commune comes from the Latin “communis”, which means “communal” in translation.
Originally, the citizens were supposed to jointly decide on the future The Left is also fighting for a reduction in bureaucratic hurdles.
The Left will demand that the citizens of Dortmund decide on key issues for the future of the city.
The Left rejects administrative structure reforms that lead to the privatisation of public tasks or the transfer of burdens to the municipalities or that are aimed exclusively at reducing staff.
We therefore make it very clear that we are fighting for improvements for the residents of the city.
These improvements must not be at the expense of the employees in the administration, whose health is put at risk by overloading or underloading.
A useful tool for this is the stress analysis, which is required by the Occupational Health and Safety Act.
This objectively establishes the level of stress and the works council is involved.
For the Left, local politics and proximity to the citizens are indispensable.
We listen and ask critical questions in the district meetings and in the council.
The Left works together with citizens' initiatives and other non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in Dortmund and tries to give them a parliamentary voice.
A solidarity society Page 94 The Left demands: • More rights for the municipalities Multilingual information should be a matter of course.
• Elimination of shadow budgets, such as the special fund, • systematic further development of the previous budget participation procedures for the municipal budget to a real citizens' budget, • special consideration of affected minorities in all participation procedures.
A solidarity societyMunicipal order service and police Municipal order service The municipal order service (KOD) has been massively upgraded in many cities in recent years.
With increasing armament and the use of dogs, they are becoming increasingly threatening.
Especially often, their measures are directed against homeless people, who are driven away from their sleeping places and fined.
Through their uniforms, which are only distinguished from the police by the lettering, the feeling of control and threat is intensified for those affected.
In addition, private security services are employed in many places, which also act excessively against poor and homeless people.
End the criminalization of poverty The instrument of the administrative order is a municipal administrative and political means that is used in many municipalities to criminalize poverty.
This is particularly evident in bans on camping or sleeping on public areas, as well as in regulations that prohibit lying on public We demand that this criminalisation finally comes to an end!
The Left demands: • Disarmament of the KOD: The KOD should not carry batons or pepper spray.
We are also against bodycams, tasers or dog squads.
• A clear distinction from the police.
The uniforms of the KOD must be clearly distinguishable from those of the police, for example by using a different colour.
• No use of private security services.
They have not lost their place in the protection of public space.
The Left demands the following deletions from the ordinance on public order: • “Prohibition of camping and overnight stays”, • “Sitting furniture against its intended purpose”, • all sections criminalising poverty.
A solidarity society Page 98 Against police violence Police is a matter for the state, but the decisions made there have a direct impact on the municipalities.
In NRW, people die particularly frequently during police operations.
In 2020 alone, seven people were killed by the police.
Only in rare cases does a trial follow – for the most part, the police officers involved are not held accountable.
Police operations end particularly frequently in death when people are in psychological emergency situations.
We demand an emergency team of psychologically trained personnel that is deployed with the police in cases of psychological emergency situations and works to de-escalate.
The use of tasers in the larger cities endangers people additionally.
Tasers are a potentially lethal weapon, which the UN Committee against Torture warns against.
Especially in disadvantaged neighborhoods, the police often act particularly brutally, while at the same time taking complaints from residents less seriously.
We demand that the police be held accountable for their work before local representatives and the public.
We fundamentally reject video surveillance.
It does not create security, but at best, it merely shifts criminality.
The Left demands: • An end to Taser use, • a pilot project for police cooperation with psychiatric clinics in cases of people in psychological crisis situations, • an end to video surveillance.
A Solidarity Society Page 99 Environment and Species Protection Environment and Species ProtectionPreventing Climate Catastrophe, Creating Climate Justice The climate crisis threatens the civilization we know in its fundamental aspects.
In order to mitigate the effects of the climate catastrophe, we must act quickly.
Several irreversible tipping points have already been reached, which can trigger a chain reaction.
All emitters of greenhouse gases must act urgently – this also includes the city of Dortmund.
The Left has introduced the idea of environmental justice into the monitoring systems of the Ruhr Regional Association.
Environmental pollution is usually particularly high where people have low incomes.
This is what the Left wants to change and protect all people from environmental pollution.
The Left was able to anchor many important points in the Dortmund Landscape Plan in the area policy of the city.
However, implementation has so far fallen short of expectations – mainly due to massive staff shortages in the The Left is calling for a significantly better equipped environmental office in terms of personnel and finances.
In this sense, we want to continue to fight for the preservation of open spaces and nature, clean air, clean drinking water that is available to all people, and a noise-free environment.
Dortmund has not yet achieved its climate goals.
On the initiative of the Left faction, the administration was instructed to achieve climate neutrality as early as 2035 – that is, much earlier than the Ampel government wanted.
In order to achieve this, all relevant areas must be included: heat, electricity generation and consumption, transport, agriculture, industry and private households.
Climate protection must not be at the expense of poorer people.
The Left is therefore calling for a social and ecological turn both in Germany and in Dortmund, and also for the declaration of a climate emergency.
The situation is serious and this must be recognized.
The climate catastrophe must be decisively combated.
Climate, environment and species protection page 101 We also reject the one-sided increase in consumer goods.
Rules must apply to everyone, and climate protection must not be a question of income It is not acceptable that those who earn more and are better off can continue to afford climate-damaging behaviour, while people with low incomes are burdened.
After all, the ecological footprint of wealthy households is many times greater than that of low-income households.
That is why the Left is calling for binding rules that apply to everyone, instead of relying on market-based incentives to adapt to the consequences of climate change.
One consequence of climate change is the increase in extreme weather events such as heavy storms, droughts, heatwaves, heavy rainfall events and flooding.
Dortmund must prepare for this.
The Left is calling for: • The development of more woodland in Dortmund.
Existing forests should be protected and reforested.
The new ecological forestry concept for Dortmund, which we helped to develop, is a milestone for the next few decades, as it will not only promote biodiversity but also bind a lot of CO2 through a higher density of trees.
Natural forests are not only more species-rich but also more resistant to droughts and diseases than tree plantations for timber production.
We are therefore calling for The Left demands: • A constant review of the climatic effects of urban planning.
Heavy rain must not lead to flooded cellars, but must be directed into rainwater collection basins and flood areas and be able to seep into the groundwater over a longer period of time for the purpose of replenishing it.
• The concentric open space model for the fresh air supply of the city must not be constantly undermined by ever new construction measures.
• The preservation of open spaces.
We are clearly against the increasing sealing off by commercial areas, parking areas and other construction measures.
Wherever possible, sealed off areas should be opened up again.
• Green roofs and facade greening must become standard in new buildings.
Green roofs store water and can mitigate the extent of heavy rain events.
In addition, they cool the surroundings through the evaporation of the stored water.
Facade greening shades house facades and thus provide coolness in the summer.
Furthermore, they are an important building block for urban ecology.
• Where green roofs and facades are not possible for structural reasons, so-called cool roofs and facades should be promoted.
These counteract the heating of the urban climate through a particularly strongly reflective coating – as can be seen, for example, on the island of Santorini.
• Heat islands must be avoided.
Green spaces with their cooling effect are to be protected from building claims.
• When assessing the environmentally and climate-damaging consequences, not only the influence on Dortmund must be taken into account, but also the overall balance.
Climate, environment and species protection Page 103 Climate, environment and species protection Preserve and create open spaces Dortmund is a large city with a high proportion of green spaces – that is a good thing and we as the Left want it to stay that way.
That is why the land consumption for motorized individual transport, home ownership and business should be immediately and permanently reduced to zero.
This is possible without disadvantages for urban development, as the decline of the old industries has left many industrial wastelands.
The Left demands that these areas be sanitized and New buildings must meet the requirements of urban ecology and microclimate, which must be laid down in the building plan.
The Left is against the privatisation of public parks and inner-city open spaces such as the Fredenbaum Park or the West Park.
The inner-city parks fulfil important functions for leisure activities, but also for climate adaptation and species protection.
Urban development The Left wants to make use of the opportunities offered by major urban development projects in the next electoral period.
For example, the International Garden Exhibition and the plans for the development of a new quarter for research and living on the former site of Hoesch Spundwand und Profile (HSP) offer both potential and risks.
© joergkessler1967 – Pixabay Climate, environment and species protection The Left demands: • Housing and science must go hand in hand on the HSP site.
A consistent greening of the new quarter on the HSP site must be pursued.
The 25% rule for social housing must also be adhered to.
Logistics areas must not be approved on the site.
Dortmund has created sufficient capacities in the logistics sector.
• The use of the International Garden Exhibition to develop new road and footpath connections.
In particular, a direct cycle connection between Huckarde and Nordstadt is considered by us to be • No inter-municipal industrial and commercial area Groppenbruch.
We are also against industrial areas on the Buddenacker, the Brechtener Niederung and in the nature conservation area south of Asseln and Wickede.
• No further development of the green zone on Steinsweg in Dortmund-Oespel.
© joergkessler1967 – Pixabay Climate, environment and species protection The Left demands: • An extension of the Ruhr environmental zone also further east along the Hellweg axis.
• Monitoring of air quality in Dortmund at more locations.
At roads such as Mallinckrodtstraße, limit values are currently not measured and therefore cannot be included in traffic planning and the residents cannot be protected from the pollution.
Disposal: Clean without rubbish The Left wants to expand the waste disposal offers – if public rubbish bins are regularly overfilled, this shows that size and emptying intervals do not match the actual needs of the users.
So We reject the use of rubbish detectives in precarious districts.
Clean air The air in Dortmund is unhealthy.
The limit values for nitrogen oxide are exceeded, which can lead to respiratory problems, asthma, cardiovascular diseases and premature death.
Instead of improving the situation – for example, at Steinstrasse – the expansion of the long-distance bus station and additional parking spaces are planned, which will lead to more traffic.
Often, traffic is also diverted away from the measured, highly polluted areas.
This only leads to a distribution of emissions; overall, the air is not made any better.
Environmental zones are to be welcomed in principle, but they are too weak in their effect for the polluted inner city area.
In general, Die Linke wants to make driving bans unnecessary by adhering to the limit values.
Climate, environment and species protection• An attractive offer through public transport and free Park & Ride places, which can significantly relieve the inner city of cars.
In the previous electoral period, the basic decision for an emissions-free inner city was made with the votes of the Left The wall should in future become a circular promenade with cafes, discos, street theatres, studios and more.
The cycle path should be expanded on its own tracks.
Water quality Water is the most important food of all.
The water quality in Dortmund is currently quite good.
The Left welcomes the cost-intensive efforts of the responsible waterworks to renovate and modernise their facilities.
The use of particle filters – as on the Rhine – could lead to further improvement.
Industrial chemicals, medicines and microplastics do not belong in drinking water.
The Left also rejects the construction of mast installations from the point of view of groundwater protection.
The Left demands the renovation of the facilities and the use of the most modern technology, as is used on the Rhine.
Most water treatment plants belong to the municipal utilities of the city of Dortmund.
However, the city is also called upon to finally create a clear legal framework for renovations and to provide cost coverage.
The ground in Dortmund is contaminated with industrial chemicals that endanger groundwater in many places.
The Left is calling for soil remediation according to the "polluter pays" principle.
Existing companies must be effectively monitored and older areas must continue to be strictly controlled.
Noise prevention In the meantime, scientific studies have sufficiently proven that noise can make you sick.
That is why we, as the Left, are calling for the findings of the noise action plan to be consistently implemented.
First, passive noise protection devices must be implemented in heavily polluted residential areas.
In the long term, a significant reduction in motorized individual traffic and freight traffic must be ensured for low noise levels.
The Dortmund airport is also a considerable source of noise pollution.
That is why the Left is calling for strict adherence to the night flight ban.
Climate, environment and species protectionA fair energy transition The Left wants the use of fossil fuels to be ended as quickly as possible, which primarily includes lignite and hard coal.
In addition, the operation of power plants using natural gas or even imported liquid gas (LNG from fracking) must also be ended as quickly as possible.
We also demand that hydrogen, especially green hydrogen, only be used where it is indispensable and no viable alternatives exist.
This primarily concerns long-term energy storage and industrial processes such as steel production.
Another demand is that no municipal heating planning should be based on gas.
Instead, the city of Dortmund must rely on renewable and sustainable heat sources from the outset.
We resolutely reject the planning of new gas infrastructure that is later to be converted to hydrogen (H2), as this only means a prolongation of the use of fossil fuels.
The energy transition can only succeed if the political prerequisites fundamentally change – in particular the laws of the federal government and the states as well as other regulatory policy frameworks.
This could also open up new measures in the municipal sector.
Nevertheless, even now the municipal politics must use all possibilities Energy transition in Dortmund The Left demands that all municipal political decisions be oriented towards the goal of achieving a complete withdrawal from the fossil energy industry by 2030.
DEW21 should increase the proportion of self-generated electricity and the proportion of renewable energy as much as possible – with the goal of becoming climate-neutral as quickly as possible.
Decentralised solutions should be preferred in order to minimise transport losses and maintain a high level of efficiency.
The expansion of solar energy and the establishment of (decentralised) storage facilities can play an important role here.
However, it is crucial that the legal restrictions that stand in the way of the construction of neighbourhood storage facilities and the mass development of tenant electricity models finally fall.
The enormous potential of solar energy, which is mainly offered by the roofs of urban buildings and municipal facilities, must be exploited quickly and comprehensively.
The installation of solar panels on private buildings must also be promoted.
The passive house standard must be aimed for in new buildings.
Climate, environment and species protection At the same time, the improvement of the energy balance in the existing buildings must be driven forward, among other things through the use However, a year and a half later, only about 10% of the approved amounts were paid out to applicants due to a lack of staff.
This approach damages the trust in the city of Dortmund and leaves citizens to foot the bill.
The funding for plug-in solar systems must therefore be expanded and the Energy Efficiency and Climate Protection Service Centre (DLZE) must be broadened, so that promised funding can be quickly paid out and future measures can be implemented efficiently.
The Left supports the strategy of building a district heating supply for Dortmund, which should be based on renewable energies as quickly as possible, and finally the use of industrial waste heat.
We also support the introduction of a vocational school for future energies at the vocational college, so that young people from Dortmund can qualify for the use of these new technologies.
Energy must remain affordable.
More and more people are hardly able to pay their energy and water bills.
The Left therefore demands that there should be no forced disconnections by DEW21 due to payment arrears in the future.
We acknowledge that DEW21 has already taken steps in recent times to avoid such disconnections DEW21 should examine whether a progressive tariff structure is possible, in which basic energy and water requirements remain affordable and higher consumption is correspondingly more heavily taxed.
We are aware that competition with private energy providers sets limits here.
Even if legal regulation could help here, everything points to the fact that the energy supply of the city should be transferred into public ownership and thus be taken out of the reach of profit-oriented corporations.
The Left demands support from the state and federal government for the implementation of the legally prescribed heat transition (see also: Chapter 1.
Housing).
Re-municipalisation of DEW21 The Left is in favour of the complete re-municipalisation of the Dortmund energy supply.
Although in 2014, through political pressure, the municipal share in DEW21 was increased from 53 to 60.1%, which was a profitable investment for the city works.
This is not enough, however.
We reject any participation of private energy corporations (such as RWE, Innogy or E.ON) in DEW21.
Instead, we want DEW21 to be transferred to 100 The Left is calling for the immediate sale of the 23.6 million RWE shares currently held by the municipal utilities.
RWE has integrated the entire power generation division into its own power plant park.
The company's goal is to keep its coal-fired power plants in operation for as long as possible and to have the public purse foot the bill for their later decommissioning through excessive compensation.
The Dortmund municipal utilities must not be involved in this business.
The close and problematic cooperation between RWE and the state government - for example, in connection with the open-cast lignite mining in the Hambach Forest - makes it clear that public participation in this company is not justifiable.
Nuclear Energy Castor transport containers carrying highly radioactive material are driving through Dortmund on their way to the uranium enrichment plant in Gronau in Münsterland.
A frequently used railway line through Lünen runs just four kilometers from the Dortmund city limits.
In the event of an accident, there is a risk to life.
The transported uranium hexafluoride can become highly toxic hydrofluoric acid when it comes into contact with water.
The In Gronau, uranium is enriched to produce fuel rods for nuclear reactors.
The plant is also the prerequisite for the production of a German atomic bomb.
In times of increasing militarisation of German foreign policy, this plant is of great importance.
The Left demands: • No development of German atomic bombs.
• End of uranium enrichment in Münsterland.
Climate, environment and species protection page 112 Preserving the stability of our ecosystems At the request of the Left faction, the preservation of biodiversity was established as a permanent task in the council's proposals as part of the climate debate.
Here, it is important not to overlook social impacts.
The die-off of insects, the decline of breeding birds and the death of native tree species, including in Dortmund, are cause for concern about the stability of our ecosystems.
Even the mass occurrence of individual species such as the oak processionary moth or the bark beetle is an indication of problematic developments (see also: Chapter 6.4.
Animal - The Left demands: • Fixed wildlife and insect protection These should, if possible, be covered by photovoltaic modules, which, according to studies, can contribute to an accelerated recovery of biodiversity and at the same time allow the use of the area for energy generation.
In this context, Die Linke is also pushing for feasibility studies on the topic of "agri-photovoltaics" on the land owned by the city of Dortmund.
• Protected areas in the city should be consistently designated as nature reserves or landscape conservation areas.
Existing protected areas should be connected and improved and secured through urban ecological measures (an example of this is the biotope network of the nature reserve Groppenbruch and the renaturated Herrentheyer Bach in Dortmund-Mengede).
• In the Dortmund nature reserves, significantly more areas must be designated for natural forest development.
The new ecological forestry concept must be consistently implemented.
Climate, Environment and Species Protection Page 113 Die Linke demands: • the desilting of areas for the benefit of the groundwater balance, • a programme for façade greening in the inner city area, • a significant increase in the number of street trees.
• The use of municipal personnel such as the fire department to provide urban trees with the necessary water during periods of drought.
If the current drought continues, urban ecology in the settlement area will gain ecological topics of increasing importance.
The roof greening to avoid heat islands, which was decided on with the votes of the Left faction in the 2020-2025 election period, is just one example.
We are also striving for a similar regulation for so-called stone gardens, which should become unsealed, ecologically meaningful areas in the future.
Climate, environment and species protection• The new Wickeder forest lake must be placed under nature protection.
• The International Garden Exhibition (IGA) in 2027 should be used to create green connections between the northern and southern parts of Dortmund along the renaturized course of the Emscher.
• The effectiveness of ecological compensation measures should be subject to stronger controls.
The compensation should be confirmed in the long term in the vicinity of the measure to be compensated.
Fixed irrigation systems should be built.
• The planting of at least three replacement trees for tree f • The renaturisation and protection of waterways.
The Left demands: • the permanent securing of the nature reserves Buschei and Alte Körne in the district of Scharnhorst.
Construction on the edge of the nature reserves is to be avoided.
• No licences for mass animal farming.
A frightening example is the planning of a bull fattening farm on Greveler Straße as a barrier between two nature reserves.
Green Belt Dortmund-East In the east of Dortmund there is the largest natural area in Dortmund with an outstanding variety of species.
The Left is campaigning for a nature and leisure area Dortmund-East.
To this end, the existing areas of Wickeder Ostholz, Wickeder Westholz, Buschei / Alte Körne, Kurler Busch up to the Lanstroper See are to be sensibly connected through reforestation and landscape conservation measures.
The Left has already achieved a lot here: The Pleckenbrinksee, which is important for bird protection, has been placed under nature conservation.
Now the new Wickeder Waldsee is also to be placed under nature conservation in its The planned construction of the L663n motorway (OWIIIa).
Here, a planning moratorium (postponement) could be achieved for the past electoral period.
The Left is calling for these plans for the construction of a motorway to finally be abandoned permanently.
Climate, environment and species protection Page 115 Climate, environment and species protection• Guidance for Dortmund farmers towards organic farming.
• The promotion of green field borders for biotopes.
• The development of an inter-municipal nature reserve with the city of Kamen, including Wickeder Ostholz, Pleckenbrinksee and Wickeder Waldsee.
The Left stands alongside nature conservation associations, which have long been calling for an end to hunting in NRW.
Killing wild animals is generally an intervention in the natural balance.
Exceptions are possible in the case of massive invasions of neozoans (raccoon, nutria), provided that other measures remain ineffective.
We also do not want to radically shoot black game in order to keep the animals out of the Dortmund urban area.
Animal protection is important – not only in connection with the already described effects of climate The use of chili, for example, also keeps the toughest forest and meadow areas from being used for livestock.
We reject winter feeding for red deer.
In addition, we demand a year-round hunting ban in nature reserves and protected landscapes.
This is based on the endangerment of the breeding bird population, especially the field fauna in Dortmund.
On the initiative of the Left faction, a respectful treatment of animals is therefore to be implemented in the Dortmund city administration.
No hunting tourism in Dortmund.
The Messe Jagd & Hund continues to market hunting trips for the killing of protected animals such as elephants, rhinoceroses and lions.
Especially problematic are trips for hunting European migratory birds, which are strictly protected in Germany.
The Left resolutely rejects this form of trophy hunting and is therefore fighting for the following goals.
A biodiversity concept is to be created.
We demand better staffing for this.
In addition, the Left has achieved numerous small but significant successes in the area of animal protection in recent years.
This includes the rescue of the breeding site in Dortmund for the black kite, when it was on the verge of extinction in Westphalia.
The appointment of an animal welfare officer, the improvement of conditions in the municipal animal shelter and the acquisition of incubators for injured or malnourished hedgehogs are also due to our initiative.
However, it must be stated that since the revision of the animal protection law in 2013 and the associated inclusion of animal protection as a state goal for the animal world, not much has improved.
Especially the so-called useful animals continue to be subjected to marketing and profit-seeking.
Left-wing politics wants to counteract this with suitable measures at the municipal level, because the state protection agency may not be limited to people alone.
We want to preserve natural living conditions and renature landscapes.
In addition, we want to end the cruel and inhumane treatment of animals - in the knowledge that no captivity can ever be 100% species-appropriate.
That is why we demand that a respectful treatment of animals be learned and practiced.
Instead of further increasing the concentration of food production, regional More efficient amphibian protection We are also campaigning for an effective protection system for amphibians to preserve their populations and counteract the decline of endangered species.
The Left is calling for: • A ban on the marketing of trophy hunting trips at the Jagd & Hund trade fair, • No advertising for hunting methods that are banned in Germany, • The city as the trade fair organiser should take responsibility.
The argument that the trade fair would then move to another location is irrelevant, as the trade fair is not run by private providers, but is an in-house trade fair of the Westfalenhallen Dortmund.
The Left is calling for: • The provision of financial and personnel resources for protection measures, • The construction of amphibian protection tunnels on new or renovated roads, • The training of staff at the local workshop to ensure continuous protection measures, • The use of high-quality materials such as long-lasting amphibian fences and their regular maintenance, • Temporary speed limits in amphibian migration areas.
Climate, environment and species protection Comprehensive insect protection Insects are essential for the ecological balance.
• Better coordination between the environmental and building departments, which should involve early involvement in road construction projects to protect local species.
Sustainable development and environmental education Sustainability must be actively implemented.
Education and cooperation are crucial to achieving long-term environmental goals.
Expanding protection for hedgehogs Hedgehogs are suffering from the loss of their habitat and biodiversity, as well as the high rate of insect death.
They are currently on the watch list of endangered species.
The Left is calling for hedgehogs to be classified as endangered species so that effective measures can be taken to preserve the animal.
The Left is calling for: • Compliance with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by 2030: Dortmund must invest in structures and inter-municipal cooperation.
• A stronger focus on and provision of more funds for education for sustainable development (ESD).
• Education about climate change and sustainability.
• Promotion of democratisation through education.
• Raising awareness among children and young people of environmentally conscious living.
Climate, environment and species protection Page 12 Although it is anchored as an elementary component in the Basic Law, the reality is different: towns and municipalities have been financially starved for years.
Federal and state laws have transferred new tasks to them without providing sufficient financial resources.
The principle of connection – “whoever orders must also pay” – is systematically undermined.
The crises of the past – Corona, energy and now recession – have hit the municipal budgets hard.
All over Germany, and also in Dortmund, numerous planned municipal expenditures have had to be cut or eliminated.
Not only urgently necessary municipal services are affected in this way, but also the economic crisis is exacerbated.
The financial regulations do not allow the municipalities any room to maneuver in order to react anticyclically or at least uncyclically to the economy, which would mean mitigating the economic crisis with constant or increasing expenditures.
This will also be a problem after overcoming the recession.
The tenders made at that time will not be able to be processed by the economy at all, since it does not have sufficient capacities in the short term.
Even in the long term, these capacities will not We are also working on this at the federal and state levels.
Despite the serious errors in the financial regulations, the work in the council is not insignificant.
There are numerous opportunities to cushion the cuts during the recession.
The Left has already made use of this in the past and we want to continue to do so in the future.
The city of Dortmund has been on the verge of losing its financial independence and handing over its self-administration to the supervisory authority for many years.
Year after year, the city's institutions fell behind the expenditures.
Only in the last two election periods has the city been getting closer to a balanced budget again and has even been able to make a profit in some budget years - mainly thanks to the increase in trade tax that the Left faction demanded early on and that has been implemented since 2013.
This has now been bringing the city record profits.
The Dortmund city leadership has been pursuing the ambition for years to outdo other municipalities with costly prestige objects.
Examples of this are the airport, the U-Tower or the football museum.
In addition, there is the area of high culture This is associated with enormous costs such as construction and operating costs, interest and payment obligations to banks and investors (which are further increased with investor models instead of relying on more cost-effective self-production), and not least with the profit outflows from the energy and water supply of DEW to a private minority shareholder.
The Left says quite clearly: The main responsibility for the emergency in the cities lies at the federal and state level - in the socially unjust tax system, which unilaterally burdens the costs of the community on workers and small business owners and spares the rich.
Finance, work and digitalization measures in the trade tax.
However, the income from income tax is declining - Dortmund is among the laggards in terms of per capita income in Germany.
For years there has been a considerable investment backlog in Dortmund - in public buildings, schools and the transport infrastructure.
At the same time, the debts of the city are increasing to around 3.5 billion euros and will rise again massively from 2026.
It is clear: This debt burden can never be reduced by the city on its own.
Therefore, This is just as clear in the area of nature and environmental protection: there, a single person is supposed to implement the city's complex landscape plan on their own.
The Left is calling for: • Strict adherence to the principle "whoever orders, also pays" (principle of congruence).
• A debt write-off – the state and federal government must relieve Dortmund of its debts.
If interest rates continue to rise, the Left is calling for the implementation of a moratorium on interest.
• The introduction of a progressive wealth tax.
• The increase of the top tax rate and relief for lower incomes in income tax and indirect taxes.
• The increase of the municipal share of income and sales tax.
• The exemption of municipal businesses from corporate tax.
• The conversion of business tax into a municipal business tax.
• An expansion of municipal taxation rights.
The Left demands: • An end to the inter-municipal dumping competition for the lowest municipal taxes and - • Constant property taxes: no burden on rents through tax increases.
Finance, Work and DigitalisationThe city of Dortmund can do a lot itself to distribute its income and expenditure more fairly.
Finance, Work and Digitalisation• Overcoming the problematic “location competition” for investors and businesses.
• Intensifying cooperation with the surrounding municipalities on an equal footing.
• The immediate stopping of the privatisation of public facilities.
• The return of already privatised services of public welfare to public ownership (re-municipalisation).
• A labour market policy that secures good wages and prevents poverty.
The tax revenue from the municipal share of income tax is falling, and Dortmund is among the laggards when it comes to disposable income.
Higher income for the people of Dortmund also means better financing of the city through more income tax.
• An end to the privatisation of public planning and services to private investors.
PPP models (public private partnership) are no longer carried out on the initiative of the Left faction, but there are still so-called investor models (for example, in the construction of childcare facilities).
As soon as the childcare quota in the childcare facilities is met, this variant of credit-like transactions should also be discontinued.
• Termination and prohibition of all speculative transactions of the city treasury with municipal debts (for example Interest derivatives).
• Increased revenue through the collection of municipal taxes and fees that do not burden low-income earners (for example, on gun ownership, mobile phone masts or gambling).
• Securing and expanding the economic activities of municipal companies, expansion of investments in infrastructure, finance, work and digitalisation.
• Higher exploitation of increases in value when redeveloping building land.
Preferably, building land should be kept in municipal hands and either developed in-house or leased to builders.
• Introduction of a citizen budget: the city organises broad citizen participation in municipal investment planning in the first step.
As soon as possible, the entire municipal budget must The participation process must include socially disadvantaged groups.
Previous attempts to involve citizens in budget consultations were undermined by attempts at abuse by neo-Nazis.
The city’s advertising was also insufficient to generate sufficient interest among democratically-oriented citizens.
However, there are (also internationally) enough examples that citizens’ budgets can work.
Finance, work and digitalisation In Dortmund, poverty and unemployment are still a bitter reality.
Especially long-term unemployed people often end up in poorly paid jobs that offer no prospects.
The Left Dortmund is therefore in favour of abolishing these jobs according to § 16d SGB II in its current form.
In their place, we want to see jobs that are subject to collective agreements and social insurance with a minimum hourly wage of 15 euros.
In addition, we are in favour of high-quality jobs according to § 16i and § 16e SGB II that offer employees a real professional and social perspective and are sustainably retained – even after the end of the funding.
Dortmund needs an active municipal labour market policy Power and gas cuts must be banned, because energy is a basic right.
The municipal hardship fund should be expanded and continue to help those in financial distress and those who are behind on payments.
Economic policy must be employment policy.
One cause of poverty in Dortmund is unemployment.
Over 38,732 Dortmunders were unemployed in October 2024.
Of these, 8,464 were registered with the employment agency and 30,477 with the Jobcenter Dortmund.
These people, as well as those participating in measures of labor market policy or those in a special employment status due to work, fall under the term underemployment.
These are people who lack a regular employment relationship.
In total, around 48,500 people are affected by this form of work.
The unemployment rate was therefore 11.7% in Dortmund in 2024.
In August 2024, 3,530 young people under 25 years of age were registered as unemployed.
More than one in four people who registered as unemployed in July 2024 were under 25 years old.
Good jobs, fair wages, social security – now!
Finance, work and digitalisationUnemployment often leads to a vicious circle of social problems, including dependence on welfare benefits.
One in six people in Dortmund received benefits to secure their livelihood at the end of 2022.
The majority of people received basic security for the unemployed.
In July 2024, 93,271 people were in needy households.
The ratio of men and women was almost identical.
In Dortmund, as in many other municipalities, poorly paid employment opportunities are offered to the long-term unemployed.
In addition, the city promotes further employment opportunities within the framework of its “Communal Employment Strategy 2020-2030” with the “Participation Opportunities Act”.
Although a tariff wage is paid here and there is the possibility of employment for up to five years, the chance of being taken on in a regular job is more than uncertain.
In addition, no contributions to unemployment insurance are paid during this time, so that after the end of this employment, there is a fall back into social welfare.
There are also only limited opportunities for participation in further training.
Statutory benefits such as Christmas and vacation pay are not paid.
The activities take place mainly in public and social services, in children's, youth and senior facilities, in school support, household help, in escort and presence services in public spaces and in public cultural and leisure facilities - in other words, work and employment that helps and benefits people.
This is socially useful, which is why the city of Dortmund should create further opportunities of this kind.
In addition, the city must convert the so-called "1-Euro jobs" into regular, social insurance-covered employment relationships, pay them according to the tariff and provide contributions to unemployment insurance.
This means compliance with the Treuegesetz and the legal minimum wage of currently 12.82 euros.
All employees must be treated equally.
The Left rejects qualification measures that merely have an employment-therapeutic effect and do not lead The main causes are unemployment and precarious work, which is not sufficient to cover the cost of living.
Therefore, supplements through social benefits and housing allowances are necessary.
Unemployment and its social consequences endanger the dignity of those affected and can drive them into a vicious circle of exclusion, hopelessness and poverty.
Finances, work and digitalisation.
This is particularly noticeable in the dependence on state support.
In Dortmund, around 85,000 people currently receive citizens' money (formerly Hartz IV).
This corresponds to about 14.5% of the population of the city - almost one in seven is affected.
The situation of children and young people is particularly alarming: around 25,000 minors in Dortmund grow up in families who are dependent on citizens' money.
This means that almost every third child in the city lives in poverty.
In addition, there are around 12,000 people who receive basic security in old age or in the event of disability according to the SGB XII.
For them, their pension or income is not sufficient to secure their livelihood.
In addition, around 3,500 refugees and asylum seekers in Dortmund receive benefits under the Asylum Seekers Benefits Act.
These figures show that poverty and social exclusion are still a major issue in Dortmund today – with far-reaching consequences for those affected and for the whole of society.
This means that the citizens’ money must be significantly increased so that no one has to live below the poverty line.
The benefits must be based on the actual cost of living – especially in a city like Dortmund.
We strongly reject the reform of social security, as it means a cut through the back door and provides for complete benefit cuts, which in turn will push more people into poverty.
Instead, we need to expand qualification and further training opportunities and create poverty-proof, collectively bargained jobs – especially in the social, cultural and public sectors.
Good work for all instead of precarious jobs and temporary work.
We as the Left are very clear that work must pay off, regardless of gender.
More and more people are affected by being poor despite having a job.
The wages in the low-wage sector and for precarious workers often do not even The Left demands a minimum wage of at least 15 euros per hour for 2025.
The Left clearly states: People in employment and their families must be able to live off their wages.
We expect the public sector to also find solutions for older citizens receiving social welfare.
A central goal of politics must be to offer all people good work and to reduce long-term unemployment.
Therefore, we demand the creation of permanent, good and socially insured jobs for the long-term unemployed.
Finance, work and digitalisation.
Thanks to the initiative of the Left faction, collective agreements have been implemented in the subsidiaries of the city, DOLOG and DOS21, which have already significantly improved the situation of employees.
Although these newly founded companies take over municipal tasks, the collective agreement was not applied to the public service in order to reduce costs.
We strongly reject this form of wage dumping and continue to fight for the application of the collective agreements of the public service in all areas in which public services are provided.
Public services and public ownership of vital natural and cultural goods.
Social security and justice require well-developed public services and public Commercial relocation Commercial land use should be linked to the creation of jobs.
Land consumption, for example through automated warehouses without employees, leads to a dead end.
We reject the establishment of commercial areas if it is at the expense of local recreation areas as well as nature conservation areas, such as in the Brechtener Niederung.
We reject private-public partnership projects in principle.
Strengthening public services The city of Dortmund, together with its subsidiaries and affiliated companies, is by far the largest local employer.
Accordingly, its responsibility for employment in the area is correspondingly high.
However, the ideology of a “lean state” in combination with the financial depletion of the municipalities is a major cause of unemployment.
We are committed to a capable, well-equipped administration.
Municipal savings and rationalization projects must not lead to further job losses.
Instead, publicly owned companies in municipal hands should be expanded.
It must be ensured that these companies are subject to full democratic control by the Council and its committees.
The Left is clearly in favour of strengthening the public service as the largest employer and in the interests of public services.
Our persistence and repeated follow-up have paid off: at the request of the Left faction, the training quota for the municipal administration has been doubled.
The municipal administration is still a major training company in Dortmund.
The Left supports this trend.
The Left demands an end to the sachgrundlose (i.e.
not based on objective reasons) fixed-term contracts in the municipal administration and municipal facilities.
The Left does not support the division of personnel into so-called service companies, wage dumping and wage flight.
We therefore criticise the outsourcing of the former municipal baths to the Sportwelt gGmbH.
Here, municipal tasks were privatised in order to undermine the collective agreement wage.
We are striving for re-municipalisation in this area.
The Left demands: • Employees must be continuously further qualified so that they can cope with future tasks.
This also applies to the changes brought about by digitalisation.
• Work must be designed to be family-friendly.
This includes family-friendly working hours and company day-care centres.
The expansion of Sunday work must be prevented.
• Employment according to collective agreements.
Employees and their families must be able to live well from their employment.
Finance, work and digitalisationThe Left demands a digitalisation that leaves no one behind.
It should not be dependent on large corporations, but should rely on open-source solutions and its own data sovereignty.
Data protection and protection against surveillance are of the highest priority.
We are committed to making digitalisation more accessible to all and insist that it does not create a power imbalance and does not exclude or leave anyone behind.
Our digitalisation should strengthen democracy rather than undermine it.
Public Money – Public Code Every year, billions of euros are spent on licensing fees, mainly to corporations such as Microsoft and Apple.
Through subscription models and proprietary file formats, municipalities, states and the federal government are put into permanent dependencies and have to continuously pay large sums of money to be able to fulfill their tasks.
This money can be put to better use.
Although Dortmund has already decided to use predominantly open-source software, this has not yet led to any results.
The Left is demanding that a consistent open-source strategy be implemented in Dortmund.
The goal is to replace proprietary software products from Microsoft, Apple and similar corporations with open-source alternatives – for example, Linux as an operating system and LibreOffice instead of Word.
Of course, the conversion of the digital infrastructure entails a considerable effort.
Software must be set up and managed, personnel must be trained.
If necessary, software must also be developed (further) in order to have solutions for special applications at hand.
All of this can be covered by the licensing costs saved.
The organisational effort can be managed through cooperation between municipalities, for example through the existing municipal associations such as the LWL.
Thanks to open source software, programs developed or optimised by one municipality can also be made available to other towns and municipalities.
The Left is committed to strengthening cooperation between municipalities in the area of digital infrastructure and software solutions.
Open source and the responsible use of public funds for the benefit of all should be at the forefront.
Digitalisation without exclusion Finances, work and digitalisation Administration should be digitalised, but with care.
The digitalisation of administrative processes can mean relief for citizens and companies, as complicated procedures, travel times or long waiting times can be avoided.
Easily accessible offers must be expanded under high data protection standards.
However, people without access to digital technologies must not be excluded from the public services of the municipalities.
There is still the right to analogue services.
We strive for data sparsity for citizens.
This means that data should only be collected if it is really needed.
The Left demands comprehensive information about which data is collected.
In addition, the collection of personal data should only take place with the express consent of the persons concerned.
Citizens have the right to information from authorities and public companies.
We are therefore advocating for the introduction of transparency regulations.
These must voluntarily publish all public data and information such as contracts, meetings with interest groups or good practices in a transparency portal online.
This must also include land sales.
Such a portal should be easily accessible and understandable.
At the same time, it must offer open interfaces so that citizens can more easily participate in democratic processes.
The Left is critical of smart city projects that are primarily geared towards corporate profits and data collection.
We only support them if they actually bring added value to the municipalities and the collected data as well as the hardware and software components used do not end up in the hands of corporations.
The Left demands: • The switch to open source for operating systems and applications.
• The merger of municipalities for digital infrastructure.
• The further development of open source solutions.
Finances, work and digitalisationDigitalisation of education In recent years, all Dortmund schools have been equipped with digital end devices.
However, the maintenance and support of these devices often remain an additional task for the teachers.
This task is sometimes carried out by the Dortmund system house (Dosys).
We want to expand this, as every school requires an administrator for the maintenance and support of the devices purchased.
The Left demands that the devices are used for as long as possible in order to avoid electronic waste.
End devices must not be replaced unnecessarily, just because manufacturers stop updates – instead, free operating systems should be installed as an alternative.
There is also a need for more knowledge about repair at schools.
This knowledge should be passed on as part of the curriculum and in extracurricular activities.
We urgently need concepts for better education in the field of digitalisation.
If the worksheet is read from a tablet instead of being printed out, this is not digital progress, but leads to students being distracted.
Digital education must in particular deal with topics such as cyber security, data protection and rights in the digital space.
Cross-cutting themes such as cyberbullying and media literacy must also be part of the curriculum.
The predominant acquisition of Apple devices means that students are getting used to these devices, but comprehensive education also prepares them for the use of other systems and software.
We demand that the available open educational platforms are used and developed and the use of proprietary platforms is reduced.
The Left demands: • digital access to public data and documents, • high data protection standards in the digitisation of administrative processes, • data sovereignty for citizens.
Finance, work and digitalisation: Use AI only moderately The Left demands that the topic of AI is dealt with extremely carefully.
“Artificial intelligence” is currently experiencing a hype and in many areas AI solutions are being proposed that could be better solved with applications without AI.
AI does not deliver reliably correct answers, is extremely computationally intensive and therefore has a high energy consumption.
In addition, there are various ethical problems and the lack of knowledge about how the AI system comes to its decisions.
Solutions without AI are therefore always preferable.
Since AI is always trained on existing data If AI is used, it must be ensured that no such error (bias) is present in the training data.
We are against the transfer of complete personal data to AI applications.
Data protection and copyright concerns must always be taken into account.
It must also be clarified in advance how and when new findings are to be incorporated into an AI program, since the retraining of the AI is extremely time-consuming and expensive in terms of finances, work and digitalization.
Cybersecurity In an increasingly digital city, where more and more objects and systems are networked with one another, cyber attacks are omnipresent.
Without a secure digital infrastructure, there can be no reliable data security.
The Left therefore demands the establishment of a mandatory information security management system (ISMS), which is implemented in cooperation with universities and civil society initiatives and is intended to ensure high security standards.
Cyber security does not only affect technology, but also the people who use it.
Therefore, mandatory training is required for employees, but also for citizens.
In this area, smaller towns and municipalities should cooperate more closely.
We, as the Left, are against any form of surveillance We do not want video surveillance in public spaces, especially if it is linked to “intelligent” applications.
We are against police projects in which individual streets are video-monitored for a short or long period of time.
Examples are the monitoring of Münsterstraße, Brückstraße and the surveillance containers.
We are also against projects of the municipal order service that are accompanied by further surveillance, such as the introduction of bodycams.
The Left demands: • No video surveillance.
• No bodycams for the municipal order service.