The Left is the party of social justice.
We are the party that fights for a good life for all!
The conditions for good local politics are more difficult than ever.
The black-red coalition has made it clear that they do not want to improve the financial situation of the municipalities.
We clearly stand against racism and right-wing hate – everywhere!
Housing is a human right, and Dortmund needs affordable housing above all else.
We are particularly committed to children and young people.
We stand for a housing policy that is oriented towards the needs of people and not the market.
Everyone has the right to be mobile, which we want to make free in the long term.
More and more people are affected by housing poverty in Germany.
In Dortmund, rents have risen by more than 50% in the last ten years.
Affordable housing is becoming scarce, especially for families, single parents and people with low incomes.
The rental system is being redistributed from the bottom up.
While tenants have to pay a large They are not renovating, but rather increasing the rent and distributing profits to shareholders.
In Dortmund, the proportion of homes owned by profit-oriented housing corporations is particularly high.
Unused or poorly managed living space should be returned to public ownership.
The city of Dortmund must also use the instrument of expropriation for this.
Large profit distributions to DSW21 mean that tenants indirectly subsidize Dortmund Airport.
Half of Dortmund's residents are entitled to housing allowance or housing benefit.
The proportion of income spent on rent is particularly high in Dortmund.
The Left is calling for well-equipped housing offices that can quickly process all applications.
Profits must be fully reinvested and kept within the company, the Left demands.
The cost of accommodation must be adjusted to the development of rents.
Land is not a commodity like any other due to its limited availability.
By granting land in ground lease, the city of Dortmund can permanently influence its use and design and prevent land speculation.
Dortmund urgently needs the construction of new, permanently occupied and price-controlled rental apartments.
We demand that the social obligations in the future must not be allowed to expire, but must continue to exist.
The crisis on the housing market cannot be solved by new construction alone.
The Left demands: An expansion of the quota for social housing construction.
No further construction of single-family homes, and preference for cooperatives.
We place value on a well-developed social infrastructure, such as day care centers, schools, shopping and meeting places.
We support the development of neighborhoods in which people can live well and safely.
In Dortmund, it is currently assumed that there are 500-600 homeless people.
Five homeless people died on the streets within three weeks in the winter of 2025.
The Left wants to effectively combat homelessness with the Housing First system.
People should be placed in their own apartments and supported according to their individual needs, for example by social educators, debt counselling, addiction support or psychologists.
All emergency overnight accommodation facilities must be accessible free of charge at all times.
Separate safe spaces must be created for queer homeless people.
Public spaces should invite people to stay and also allow for longer stays.
For these people, it is a matter of survival, especially in winter.
For Dortmund alone, the conversion would cost around 3 billion euros.
DEW21 has managed to develop a concept for a CO2-free district heating supply in cooperation with the Dortmunder Gasrußwerke.
The further expansion of the district heating network is sensible, but must take social aspects into account.
The district heating connection must remain affordable for tenants in particular.
Dortmund power grid must be modernized and expanded for the widespread use of heat pumps and electric mobility.
Public transport is the most efficient and socially acceptable mass transport medium.
Public transport scores points above all because it is space-saving and can be designed to be accessible to all citizens.
The focus must be on the expansion of the rail network.
Cycling is a particularly fair form of mobility: Even children and people with physical disabilities can be on to the move quickly thanks to e-bikes.
For this to work, the cycle paths must be safe, which is currently not the case in Dortmund.
The Left demands: The expansion of cycle paths not only towards the centres, but throughout the entire city area.
Cyclists must be protected by their own barriers, just like pedestrians.
Restrictions may only be at the expense of car traffic.
Free transport of bicycles, cargo bicycles and bicycle trailers in public.
More cycle programmes for children and young people with free bicycles and cycling lessons.
The standard speed in cities should be set to 30 km/h.
In 2023, 423 pedestrians died in traffic accidents in Germany – more than the previous year (368) In total, 2,839 people lost their lives on German roads in 2023.
Every second citizen in Dortmund – statistically including the very elderly and infants – owns a car.
A pedestrian-friendly city enables all people to move around safely, comfortably and quickly on foot.
Pedestrians are often overlooked in traffic planning in Dortmund.
A too large proportion of transport takes place with trucks, which leads to poor traffic and mobility justice.
The Left demands the introduction of a pilot project for the construction of a Cargo Tram network.
The city must ensure that goods transport is better regulated, alternatives to lorries are strengthened and deliveries are made more efficiently.
Die Linke Dortmund demands that transport for post and local delivery be brought under municipal control.
Jobs in public transport should be prioritised.
The parking situation, especially in residential areas, often leads to emergency routes being blocked.
Large SUVs and heavy vehicles cause higher CO2 emissions and pose a greater danger in road traffic and overlook pedestrians, cyclists, especially children.
Such vehicles have no place in our cities.
Social disadvantage, poverty and exclusion have been a sad reality in Dortmund for many years.
The official action plan "Social City" has hardly relieved these social spaces.
A solidary urban society ensures that everyone can participate in public life – and not only those who can afford it.
For the Left, a social city of Dortmund creates and secures good jobs, fights poverty and inclusion.
It provides demand-oriented, barrier-free and inclusive social facilities for all generations.
Poverty shows a blatant failure of politics, says the Left Dortmund.
All people, regardless of background or life situation, have a right to public spaces.
Begging ban zones are incompatible with human rights and the Basic Law.
The focus must be shifted away from repressive measures against poor and homeless people and towards social support, prevention and respect.
Poverty is not combated with bans, fines or expulsions.
The city must take social responsibility and remove bureaucratic and financial hurdles.
Die Linke Dortmund is campaigning for more public spaces, covered seating areas and places to stay.
The Dortmund Card (formerly DoPass) should be expanded to a comprehensive social pass and automatically sent out when corresponding benefits are received.
The Left demands: Perspectiveless and poverty-promoting “Ein-Euro-Jobs”, combined wage positions as well as precarious employment in all forms must be ended.
The city of Dortmund urgently needs to take comprehensive measures to help those affected and to ensure permanent housing in a safe and stable environment.
The Left demands the expansion of the Housing First concept, which provides homeless people with their own accommodation without prior conditions.
The housing reserve programme must be further expanded, as there are simply not enough apartments in Dortmund to meet demand.
Die Linke is calling for all emergency accommodation to be transferred to municipal ownership in the medium to long term.
This will ensure that they are designed in a humane way.
Die Linke is calling for the expansion of the drug consumption area at Grafenhof as well as the establishment of further easily accessible consumption.
In addition, we demand the Expansion of drug counselling centres and the provision of care for drug-dependent homeless people.
This particularly vulnerable group needs publicly accessible toilets and showers at all times.
The prompt implementation of the container sleeping place project is urgently necessary, but should only be seen as a temporary solution until viable concepts for the permanent accommodation of homeless people have been developed.
The Left is committed to an inclusive Dortmund that does not exclude anyone and enables self-determined living for all.
The construction of barrier-free, publicly accessible toilet facilities in all districts, parks and central locations.
The Left is also committed to the increased use of sign language interpreters at public events and to comprehensive training for municipal employees to raise awareness in dealing with people with disabilities.
Inclusion as social and professional participation is a human right that belongs to everyone.
Die Linke demands that a disability not restrict political participation.
Polling stations must be selected or adapted accordingly and equipped for the election.
Public buildings and cultural institutions must be equipped with hearing systems and visual signals in elevators.
The health sector is one of the largest employers in the region.
Die Linke is committed to an offensive for retrofitting public transport: By.
The goal must be to increase the proportion of affordable and barrier-free housing in the Dortmund urban area to 15%.
There is still a glaring shortage of skilled workers in the field of nursing and geriatric care.
The Left is calling for a qualification offensive to train nursing staff from all clinics and care and nursing homes in public ownership in Dortmund.
We are against the closure of individual wards for economic reasons.
Instead, we want good care throughout Dortmund.
The Left is calling for the expansion of health kiosks in Dortmund.
The entire Ruhr area is significantly under-supplied.
Even vaccinations are delayed due to the lack of vaccines.
25% of the total population in Germany will require age-related care and support in everyday life.
The municipalities are facing major challenges that must be addressed now.
There can be no more ‘business as usual’
Die Linke is in favour of free service providers only being assigned to municipal service providers if the latter guarantee the same employment law standards as for employees of the municipality.
The demand also applies to religious service providers.
Many of the actors and actresses at the Schauspielhaus and the other departments only have annual contracts.
The Left Party in the Council has, at the end of 2024, provided 200,000 euros for the free scene.
Die Linke is calling above all for adequate staffing for the Mondo Mio children’s museum in the Westfalenpark.
A particular concern of ours as anti-fascists is also the Steinwache memorial site.
The Left Party has also provided funds for cultural centers such as Dings e.V., Welthaus, Taranta Babu.
There is still a lack of sports halls that are barrier-free and therefore accessible to people with disabilities.
We must therefore work harder to renovate older halls and sports facilities.
The swimming pools in Dortmund are a bigger problem.
A large part of the pools were privatized years ago.
Die Linke promotes the access of sports clubs to extra-curricular commitment opportunities.
The Left has been calling for free admission for Dortmund children and young people in open-air pools during the summer holidays for years.
In Dortmund, around 120,000 senior citizens live, and old-age poverty is increasingly becoming a pressing problem.
Almost every second statutory retirement pension is below 1,000 euros gross, and 7.4% of pensioners (12,980) are dependent on social benefits.
The Left is calling for a minimum pension of 1,400 euros net to effectively combat poverty in old age.
The city of Dortmund should actively promote alternative forms of housing, such as senior citizens' WGs and multi-generational houses.
Senior policy must be given a much higher priority in political life and not be limited to the provision of care and subsidies for old people's homes.
It is about enabling senior citizens to participate fully in society and culture.
Digitalisation can offer important opportunities to support the mobility of older people, especially those with health problems or other restrictions.
Digital solutions such as exercise programmes, virtual training opportunities and fall prevention technologies can help pensioners to maintain and improve their physical mobility.
In Dortmund, twelve senior citizens' offices, run by the city and the associations of the Free Welfare Service, already offer the opportunity to obtain information on all issues surrounding ageing in all districts of the city.
The Left demands for day care centres that are well equipped and available to all children whose parents wish to use them.
New day care centres should be built by municipal building companies rather than private investors, to whom no land should be sold.
The profession of childcare worker must become more attractive.
The Left demands: The special promotion of children’s and youth facilities.
Free holiday activities and cost-effective holiday camps.
The use of sports grounds, halls and swimming pools must be possible regardless of membership.
Education is a human right that every child is entitled to, regardless of the social status and income of their parents.
Current education policy contributes significantly to social problems such as limited opportunities in the job market and low incomes.
Education policy must focus more on promoting media competence and political education in order to counteract disinformation, social division and polarisation.
The Left favors schools that lead to more educational justice: This is of course the comprehensive school as a place of joint learning, as well as the Primus school, which is currently still running as a model experiment.
There it is possible for students to learn together from class 1 to 13 without having to change schools.
A livable community is based on respect - respect for diverse life concepts and opinions.
Fascist and right-wing organizations pursue the exact opposite and rely on exclusion.
Right-wing propaganda tries to make refugees, migrants and minorities responsible for poverty and social problems.
Poverty and precarious living conditions are widespread in Dortmund and must be combated in the sense of social justice.
Neo-fascists and right-wing populists are still present in municipal representations, including in Dortmund.
Five people have been murdered by Nazis in Dortmund since 2001.
There is a likely connection between the Dortmund Nazi scene and the terrorist group “National Socialist Underground” (NSU)
The Left will use its function in municipal committees to publicly name police violence against anti-fascists.
The Dortmund Steinwache, once the headquarters of the NS-Sonderpolizei Gestapo, is today a memorial to the crimes of the national socialist terror regime.
The Left is committed to renaming streets and squares that still bear the names of racists, antisemites and militarists.
The Left Party considers the Backup victim support centre to be indispensable.
In view of the increasing anti-Semitism, we as the Left Party declare our solidarity with Jewish fellow citizens of our city.
It is shameful that Jewish institutions have to be protected 80 years after the Holocaust.
Despite formal gender equality, women and queer people are still exposed to numerous forms of discrimination.
Women still earn significantly less than men and do more unpaid care work.
They are confronted with prejudices and are still underrepresented in leadership positions.
The Left is committed to the preservation and expansion of women’s shelters and safe havens for people affected by or threatened by violence.
Measures for a diverse lifestyle that also take into account queer lifestyles must be developed at the local level.
An end to the preference of marriage as the only recognized lifestyle is necessary – all family forms must be equally supported.
Every third woman in Germany experiences physical or sexualized violence at least once in her life.
Violence against women is deeply rooted in patriarchal power relations and affects millions of women worldwide.
Local politics must take specific measures to counteract this injustice.
The Left is committed to promoting and maintaining women's and girls' projects.
Social projects must reduce social inequalities between the sexes.
The images that surround us every day shape our thinking – and the public space that we all use together should not be used as a stage for discrimination.
In Dortmund, almost 35% of the people have a migration background, and the proportion is even much higher among children under six years old.
Migrants are particularly affected by social cutbacks and disadvantages.
The Left is calling for: a municipal housing policy that actively prevents the creation of ghettos, a comprehensive support programme for children with a migrant background in daycare centres and schools.
The end of discrimination and exclusion, the provision of decent living conditions for asylum seekers and those granted leave to remain, and better access to healthcare for Asylum seekers.
The city of Dortmund is striving for a solidarity-based society, the Left says.
Bundeswehr should not be advertised as an employer and career opportunity.
Young people must be actively informed that they can object to the transfer of their data.
The Left demands that people who have fled from war zones to our commune are listened to and included as important eyewitnesses in the communal peace work.
The municipality ensures that the planning of civil-military cooperation is limited exclusively to defensive operations such as natural disasters.
The Left will demand that the citizens of Dortmund decide on key issues for the future of the city.
For the Left, local politics and proximity to the citizens are indispensable.
We listen and ask critical questions in the district meetings and in the council.
The Left works together with citizens' initiatives and other non-governmental organisations (NGOs) in Dortmund and tries to give them a parliamentary voice.
The municipal order service has been massively upgraded in many cities in recent years.
In 2020 alone, seven people were killed by the police in NRW.
The Left demands the following deletions from the ordinance on public order: “Prohibition of camping and overnight stays’, “Sitting furniture against its intended purpose”, and “All sections criminalising poverty’.
We fundamentally reject video surveillance.
We demand an emergency team of psychologically trained personnel that is deployed with the police.
The Left has introduced the idea of environmental justice into the monitoring systems of the Ruhr Regional Association.
Environmental pollution is usually particularly high where people have low incomes.
Dortmund has not yet achieved its climate goals.
The Left is calling for a social and ecological turn both in Germany and in Dortmund, and also for the declaration of a climate emergency.
The situation is serious and this must be recognized.
The climate catastrophe must be decisively combated.
Rules must apply to everyone, and climate protection must not be a question of income.
The ecological footprint of wealthy households is many times greater than that of low-income households.
The Left is calling for: The development of more woodland in Dortmund.
Existing forests should be protected and reforested.
Green roofs and facade greening must become standard in new buildings.
Land consumption for motorized individual transport, home ownership and business should be immediately and permanently reduced to zero.
The decline of the old industries has left many industrial wastelands.
New buildings must meet the requirements of urban ecology and microclimate, which must be laid down in the building plan.
Heat islands must be avoided.
Green spaces with their cooling effect are to be protected from building claims.
A consistent greening of the new quarter on the HSP site must be pursued.
Environmental zones are to be welcomed in principle, but they are too weak in their effect for the polluted inner city area.
Die Linke wants to make driving bans unnecessary by adhering to the limit values.
The wall should in future become a circular promenade with cafes, discos, street theatres, studios and more.
The cycle path should be expanded on its own tracks.
The Left is calling for soil remediation according to the "polluter pays" principle.
The use of particle filters – as on the Rhine – could lead to further improvement.
Industrial chemicals, medicines and microplastics do not belong in drinking water.
The Left wants the use of fossil fuels to be ended as quickly as possible.
The Left demands that all municipal political decisions be oriented towards the goal of achieving a complete withdrawal from the fossil energy industry by 2030.
The enormous potential of solar energy, which is mainly offered by the roofs of urban buildings and municipal facilities, must be exploited quickly and comprehensively.
The installation of solar panels on private buildings must also be promoted.
The passive house standard must be aimed for in new buildings.
The Left supports the strategy of building a district heating supply for Dortmund, which should be based on renewable energies.
The Left is calling for the immediate sale of the 23.6 million RWE shares currently held by the municipal utilities.
RWE has integrated the entire power generation division into its own power plant park.
The company's goal is to keep its coal-fired power plants in operation for as long as possible and to have the public purse foot the bill for their decommissioning.
The Dortmund municipal utilities must not be involved in this business.
The die-off of insects, the decline of breeding birds and the death of native tree species, including in Dortmund, are cause for concern.
Die Linke is pushing for feasibility studies on the topic of "agri-photovoltaics" on the land owned by the city of Dortmund.
Protected areas in the city should be consistently designated as nature reserves or landscape conservation areas.
The International Garden Exhibition (IGA) in 2027 should be used to create green connections.
The Left is campaigning for a nature and leisure area Dortmund-East.
The Left has already achieved a lot here: The Pleckenbrinksee, which is important for bird protection, has been placed under nature conservation.
The planned construction of the L663n motorway (OWIIIa) is to be abandoned permanently.
The Left faction wants a respectful treatment of animals in the Dortmund city administration.
The Messe Jagd & Hund continues to market hunting trips for the killing of protected animals such as elephants, rhinoceroses and lions.
Especially problematic are trips for hunting European migratory birds, which are strictly protected in Germany.
The Left resolutely rejects this form of trophy hunting and is therefore fighting for the following goals.
The Left is calling for a ban on the marketing of trophy hunting trips at the Jagd & Hund trade fair.
The city as the trade fair organiser should take responsibility, they say.
They are also campaigning for an effective protection system for amphibians to preserve their populations and counteract the decline of endangered species.
The Left wants to end the cruel and inhumane treatment of animals - in the knowledge that no captivity can ever be 100% species-appropriate.
All over Germany, and also in Dortmund, numerous planned municipal expenditures have had to be cut or eliminated.
The principle of connection – “whoever orders must also pay’ – is systematically undermined.
Dortmund city leadership has been pursuing the ambition for years to outdo other municipalities with costly prestige objects.
The Left says quite clearly: The main responsibility for the emergency in the cities lies at the federal and state level - in the socially unjust tax system.
Dortmund is among the laggards in terms of per capita income in Germany.
The debts of the city are increasing to around 3.5 billion euros and will rise again massively from 2026.
The Left is calling for a debt write-off - the state and federal government must relieve Dortmund of its debts.
Tax revenue from the municipal share of income tax is falling, and Dortmund is among the laggards when it comes to disposable income.
In Dortmund, poverty and unemployment are still a bitter reality.
Especially long-term unemployed people often end up in poorly paid jobs that offer no prospects.
In their place, we want to see jobs that are subject to collective agreements and social insurance.
One cause of poverty in Dortmund is unemployment.
Over 38,732 Dortmunders were unemployed in October 2024.
More than one in four people who registered as unemployed in July 2024 were under 25 years old.
One in six people in Dortmund received benefits to secure their livelihood at the end of 2022.
Dortmund promotes further employment opportunities within the framework of its “Communal Employment Strategy 2020-2030” with the “Participation Opportunities Act’ The city must convert the so-called "1-Euro jobs" into regular, social insurance-covered employment relationships.
All employees must be treated equally.
The Left rejects qualification measures that merely have an employment-therapeutic effect and do not lead.
Around 3,500 refugees and asylum seekers in Dortmund receive benefits under the Asylum Seekers Benefits Act.
The Left demands a minimum wage of at least 15 euros per hour for 2025.
People in employment and their families must be able to live off their wages.
A central goal of politics must be to offer all people good work and to reduce long-term unemployment.
The city of Dortmund, together with its subsidiaries and affiliated companies, is by far the largest local employer.
We reject the establishment of commercial areas if it is at the expense of local recreation areas as well as nature conservation areas.
Social security and justice require well-developed public services and public Commercial relocation should be linked to the creation of jobs.
The Left demands a digitalisation that leaves no one behind.
It should not be dependent on large corporations, but should rely on open-source solutions and its own data sovereignty.
Data protection and protection against surveillance are of the highest priority.
The goal is to replace proprietary software products from Microsoft, Apple and similar corporations.
The Left is committed to strengthening cooperation between municipalities in the area of digital infrastructure and software solutions.
Open source and the responsible use of public funds for the benefit of all should be at the forefront.
The digitalisation of administrative processes can mean relief for citizens and companies, as complicated procedures, travel times or long waiting times can be avoided.
The Left is critical of smart city projects that are primarily geared towards corporate profits and data collection.
The Left demands that the devices are used for as long as possible in order to avoid electronic waste.
Digital education must in particular deal with topics such as cyber security, data protection and rights in the digital space.
Cross-cutting themes like cyberbullying and media literacy must also be part of the curriculum.
The Left demands that the topic of AI is dealt with extremely carefully.
We are against the transfer of complete personal data to AI applications.
We do not want video surveillance in public spaces, especially if it is linked to ‘intelligent’ applications.
Cyber security does not only affect technology, but also the people who use it.
mandatory training is required for employees and citizens.
The Left demands no video surveillance for the municipal order service